Why the wealth gap just keeps getting wider
Last week's official figures on poverty and inequality in Labour's first three years in office were disappointing. But the figures will get better in the next couple of years, for one good reason and one bad. The good reason is that measures such as the working families tax credit, which help to raise the "floor" for those at the bottom, will have had longer to take effect. The bad reason is that the economy is slowing down, and may even tip into recession, so pay rates at the top will stop roaring ahead, creating the statistical illusion of a more cohesive society.
One of the oddest things about modern politics is that our income statistics are compiled according to a theory that hardly anyone believes - namely that narrowing the gap between those at the top and those at the bottom is the primary goal of social policy. Most people think it is more important to make the poor richer than the rich poorer, but the fact that the poor are getting richer is statistically overshadowed by what is happening to half a million high flyers. Of course, there is a relative aspect to deprivation, but why can't we have statistics that combine both relative and absolute measures and so give us a better sense of whether we are making progress in the things that matter?
The difficult politics of all this is revealed in the last British social attitudes survey: 80% of the population agree that the gap is too large between those on high and low incomes, but only 37% want active government redistribution. Hence Labour's systematic murkiness about its limited redistributive efforts. And these efforts have less effect than they once did. When Labour redistributed in the 1970s the rich-poor gap automatically narrowed. Now, thanks to the reward structure of the modern economy, you can redistribute away and it merely slows the widening of the gap.
The centre left needs a new political story to accommodate this fact. To use the old Trot argot (which certain cabinet ministers will recall), it should think in terms of a minimum programme and a maximum programme. The minimum programme is about raising the floor of incomes and life chances as high as possible.
The politically tougher maximum programme moves on to breaking up concentrations of privilege and making serious attempts to narrow the income gap. These two programmes are not in conflict; they are on a spectrum and the line between them does not represent the dividing point between left and right, as Roy Hattersley maintains.
It is true that the government has so far not ventured far beyond the minimum programme. One of the rare occasions it did so was in the brave decision to make the middle classes contribute more towards their children's higher education. For years, people on middle and lower incomes have paid for the free university education of people on higher incomes; it is one of the factors that has lessened the redistributive effect of the tax system.
Another egalitarian decision was to reject the recommendations of the royal commission on long-term care for the elderly, which wanted free care for everyone including those sitting on valuable property assets in the south-east of England. Curiously both these decisions were bitterly opposed by the left.
So perhaps it doesn't matter if there is no Conservative party to defend the propertied classes - the left is doing it for them.
Time to pay up for the sins of slavery
I recently discovered that one of my great great grandfathers was a slave owner. It has made me think again about the issue of paying reparations for slavery - something we will hear a lot more about this summer thanks to a UN conference which will be dominated by the issue.
Like most white people who think about it at all, I used to consider reparations for slavery a bit of a joke; something to help black radicals caress their sense of victimhood.
I was familiar with all the arguments against. The difficulty of deciding who should pay and who should benefit; the culpability of the black rulers of the societies from whence the slaves came. And, anyway, wasn't it all too long ago? And if reparations are paid for slavery, where will it stop? What about the Irish famine, and so on?
And there's the rub. For, of course, the principle of making amends down the generations has been embraced many times in recent years - and in the case of reparations for the Holocaust it has involved a great deal more than just saying sorry. Substantial sums have changed hands.
Which reminds me, my slave-owning ancestor was a Jew. He left Bavaria in the early 1840s - where Jews were still treated as third-class citizens - and ended up in Mobile, Alabama (where Bob Dylan got stuck). He became a prosperous financier and, being in the South, he bought a few slaves. When in Rome - there is nothing surprising about this except for those people who regard the oppressed as especially virtuous.
There is nothing especially virtuous about today's African-Americans. But America does owe them a special debt. There is nothing to compare - in the modern world - with the centuries of state-sponsored slavery followed by the century of state-sponsored discrimination. And most of black America thinks that part of the answer is reparations.
Charles Krauthammer, a white, conservative American commentator, thinks so, too. Writing in Prospect magazine, he says the decision to pay that debt in the form of a system of racial preferences was a mistake - it violates the principle of equal treatment, and damages those it claims to help. So, he says, let's abolish affirmative action in return for a lump-sum payment - in the tens of thousands of dollars - to every African-American family.
"In one gesture," he writes, "an acknowledgment is made not of collective guilt but of collective responsibility. We then end the endless partial payment of affirmative action and return to the original vision of the civil-rights movement: colour blindness."
DIY policing
The recent TV footage of white (or Protestant) police officers being pelted by Asian (or Catholic) youths is a bleak reminder of how little progress has been made in attracting minorities into the police force. Community sanction against those who do join is still a problem, but there is also the more straightforward issue that many of the decent, law-abiding people in the minority groups simply don't want to join the police as a full-time job.
So why not have a variation on the old theme of "special constables" - part-time officers who would be legally and operationally part of the local police but would be recruited overwhelmingly from the relevant minority? The result would be a form of self-policing - one kind of affirmative action that might be worth trying.
 
Obituary: Bob Johnson
 
Bob Johnson, who has died suddenly in Sardinia aged 60, was an unusual combination of businessman and philanthropist. He was the founder and chairman of the £200m turnover mail-order retailer Farepak plc (subsequently called Kleeneze) - best known for its cult toys such as the singing Christmas tree and the talking fish.
But behind his bluff manner lay two other remarkable career stories. The first was at the heart of Britain's postwar meat retailing trade, marked, above all, by the decline of the family butcher. The second had its roots in the four years he spent training for the Roman Catholic priesthood, and came to fruition in his later financial support for organisations such as the Impact Foundation, which runs hospitals in Africa, India and Bangladesh, and the Refugee Study Centre at Oxford University.
Johnson was born in London, the youngest child of a Smithfield meat trader who had set up the John Manson butchering business. He spent his early years in Torbay, Devon, where he had been evacuated with his mother, while his father worked as the meat allocator for south London during rationing. He was sent to a Catholic boarding school but, after failing his A-levels, began work in the Peckham branch of his father's company, where he received the opposite of preferential treatment and barely earned enough to eat.
At the age of 21, after traveling in Ireland and France, he entered the Catholic Order of White Fathers as a novice, with a view to becoming a missionary, and, for three years, studied theology and philosophy. He left the order at 25, having struggled with the vows of obedience, chastity and poverty, though he always retained and lived by his Christian principles.
Having rejoined the family business as a buyer at Smithfield market, Johnson soon made his mark, and was given responsibility for a shop on the King's Road, which operated Farepak, a small hamper business with a turnover of £169,000. He built up trade by knocking on doors and developing a network of agents across the country. He was also helped by the decline of the high-street butchers who had provided a Christmas hamper service for regular customers - a business the growing supermarket sector was not interested in taking over.
Appointed managing director of Manson's in 1980, he could see that the high-street butcher had no future. His father and his fellow directors disagreed, and, after a protracted struggle, Johnson decoupled Farepak from Manson's and left to run it. His views were quickly vindicated as the hamper business grew rapidly, while the butcher's shops floundered in the face of the supermarket chains. With turnover at £3.5m, he transferred Farepak to larger premises in Swindon.
During the 1980s, Farepak emerged as a broader-based mail order company, offering meat, frozen foods, drinks, gifts and shopping vouchers. In 1989, it was floated on the unlisted securities market, and, in its first year, achieved turnover of £30.8m. In 1993, the company moved to a full listing on the London stock exchange, and, in 1995, it took over Kleeneze, a business selling cleaning products door to door.
As the business thrived, Johnson devoted more time to philanthropy and the missionary impulse of his youth. In 1991, he met Hein Raat, an eminent orthopaedic surgeon, and, over the following 10 years, funded four expeditions to countries such as Malawi, Ghana and Indonesia, where Raat performed 3,200 operations on people with congenital deformities, mainly arising from polio and leprosy. This work also led Johnson to become a funder and trustee of the Impact Foundation.
Most recently, he supported the refugee studies centre at Oxford, the world's leading institute for the study of forced migration. When the Flick family withdrew financial support for the chair of European thought, also at Oxford, Johnson quietly stepped in to fill the gap. A year later, he was appointed a member of the chancellor's court of benefactors; The Crisis Of Reason: European Thought, 1848 to 1914, by Professor John Burrow, one of the chair's most recent holders, is dedicated to him.
Johnson was a voracious reader, often devouring more than 10 books during his two-week summer holidays in Italy. Reflecting his interest in writing and current affairs, he became an investor in, and director of, Prospect magazine (which I edit), where he was a constant source of useful ideas and editorial and business advice. His love of reading was reflected in his philanthropic work for the Bodleian Library, where he helped transform the profitability of the Bodleian shop.
After a happy summer evening watching opera on the loggia of the 17th-century Garsington Manor, he became one of the earliest sponsors of Garsington Opera. His gifts helped the opera company renovate a barn for dressing rooms and offices.
From 1997, Johnson's life and experiences were captured in a series of interviews for the National Life Story Collection, an oral history initiative set up by the British Library. He also funded a number of extended interviews with key people in the meat trade for the collection, thus preserving for posterity the life of the trade that had given him his start.
He was made a freeman of the City of London and a member of the Worshipful Company of Butchers, in recognition of his pioneering work in the meat trade. He was also an early advocate of the internet, though he always thought of it as a communications tool best used for business-to-business contact rather than commercial retailing.
Johnson was a private, modest man with a sardonic wit. Financial success did not change him; it provided a kind of freedom. His level head and generous heart allowed him to use it wisely and compassionately.
He is survived by his Italian-born wife, Bruna, and their two children, Nicholas and Chiara.
• Robert 'Bob' Alan Johnson, businessman and philanthropist, born September 24 1940; died August 10 2001
 
Canada, boring and bland? Not any more
 
Do we want to end up like Canada or California? To state Britain's choice in the great European constitutional debate in such terms is no doubt crude, but it has a certain appealing directness.
Europe will never become a federal state like the US, so the California analogy does not fully apply (and even if it did, the California spot would be reserved for Germany). And the implication that Canada is an independent but rather dull and irrelevant place is also wrong, probably on all counts.
But the interesting thing about the analogy is how it has contributed to a reassessment of boring old Canada by the British right. Canada used to enjoy "most-loathed nation" status among Anglo-Saxon conservatives, partly because it was the founding father of multi-culturalism (it had quotas for French-speakers long before such things had been heard of in the US). The right also saw it as the Sweden of North America; having little power itself, it was always trying to smother other people's power (especially that of the US), often with insufferable self-righteousness.
Canada's most famous conservative son, Conrad Black, has spent much of his life at war with that liberal Canada and has poured part of his fortune into a new Canadian newspaper, the National Post, in an attempt to undermine it.
But suddenly Canada is looking rather different through British conservative eyes. Of course, they still dislike all the liberal stuff, but they now see a country with all the trappings of real national sovereignty that is also a player in all the big clubs - G7, Nato etc. And that is not likely to change, even if Canada does enter a single market- type arrangement with the US.
Canada, in other words, represents the dream of most moderate eurosceptics - a country which enjoys access to a giant market, but with its foreign policy, defence policy, social policy and much of its economic policy still made at home. And it has a fair amount of influence on the world stage. If the Conservative party ever returns to power or, indeed, if Europe does start to evolve inner and outer cores, we will hear a lot more about the Canadian model. We will also have to look more closely at just how much independence from big brother next door Canada really does enjoy.
 
 
Liberal ways
 
I have just been on holiday in Cornwall. To a sensitive member of the liberal elite like myself it is quite shockingly eurosceptic.
One can see why. It is a long way from the continent and its small farmers feel that they are ruled by Brussels without getting much in return. None the less, nothing prepared me for a visit to the Trago Mills discount store where they hang effigies of "traitors" such as Chris Patten and hand out leaflets urging people to take up arms against the EU.
Yet most of Cornwall, and indeed many of Britain's other eurosceptic strong-holds in Scotland and the west country, are represented by that clean, open, honest party the Liberal Democrats - who are, of course, the most pro-European party in the country.
 

 
The war has brought us a better world - so far
 
If the war against terror and the Taliban could be frozen now, the geopolitical balance sheet would look pretty positive. On the plus side we have the following: US re-engagement with the world, which among other things is a necessary condition of solving the Israel/ Palestine problem (it was American pressure on Israel after the Gulf war that led eventually to the Oslo peace process); Russia has been brought in from the cold; the EU has hung together and busied itself usefully with the softer side of coalition building; a big push has been delivered to third world debt cancellation and reform of the international financial institutions.
Domestically, too, the outcomes have been largely positive. Tony Blair has shown that Britain can still play a bridge role between America and Europe, which has helped him to turn the Franco-German domination of the EU into a Franco-German-British triumvirate. And the government's enhanced wartime prestige has allowed a host of sensible u-turns from cannabis to asylum vouchers (councillors might even get the higher expenses they deserve, which was the dreadful news that poor Jo Moore was proposing to bury).
What about the negative side of the balance sheet? Islamic fundamentalists everywhere have a fresh cause and a hero (possibly soon a martyr). In the short term the political situation in many Muslim countries will get worse - for, as a condition of signing up to the anti-terror coalition, most moderate Muslim leaders will expect a free hand to move against any dissent. This will snuff out the few liberal currents within Islamist radical groups and drive them into using ever more destructive methods. Finally, the terror attack on America has shown that terror works - the west is now far more sensitive to a host of third world grievances, some of which might even be addressed.
The balance sheet as a whole, however, looks far more encouraging from the point of view of a citizen of the west than from that of someone in the Islamic world. This imbalance will become even worse if the Taliban do not split apart in the next few weeks, as western strategists seemed to have been assuming they would. For if national reconstruction in Afghanistan cannot begin and aid does not flow in, then the bodies of many hundreds of thousands of impoverished Afghans will have to be added to the balance sheet, too, by the end of the winter.
 
Why religion is everyone's business
 
A few days after the terrorist attack on America I began asking people I knew whether they could describe the difference between the main Sunni and Shia traditions of Islam. Of the 15 or so people I asked, mainly highly educated white Britons, only one made a decent stab at an answer. I expect the number would be rather higher today. Judging by the booming sales of the Koran and the many guides to Islam - not to mention the media exposure of experts on the Islamic world - the thinking classes in the west have signed up for a crash course in comparative religion.
My own magazine, Prospect, has joined in the public seminar by offering a free CD-rom with the Koran and a 25,000-word guide to Islam (partly based on the excellent Islam: A Very Short Introduction by Malise Ruthven).
This has not pleased all our readers. A few nutty Christians have cancelled their subscriptions on the grounds that the Koran is blasphemous (which of course it is; it says that Christ was not crucified, was not the son of God and did not rise from the dead). Rather more depressingly, several Muslim readers have also protested on a mixture of grounds, from resentment at the alleged connection between Islam and terror to the more inchoate feeling of being condescended to. But what seems to underlie both reactions is the feeling that well-meaning secular liberals have no business sticking their noses into the world of belief.
It is true that there is something slightly comic about our overwhelmingly secular political class earnestly grappling with religious concepts. But the idea that the religious and the secular worlds are divided by such a chasm of experience that they cannot communicate with one another is horrifying.
It seems to me a self-evident good that more non-Muslims are trying to understand at least the basic outlines of the Islamic faith. Apart from anything else, this is the faith of about 1.5m of my fellow British citizens.
There are furious debates going on at present about the future direction of the faith; these are debates that outsiders are unlikely to have much influence over, but their outcome will affect British society in important ways.
Most people would prefer to see a more open, less defensive and beleaguered, Islam emerging from these debates - both here and abroad in the Islamic world.
Some Muslims would, however, see such a move as the start of a "hollowing out" of the faith, with the prospect of following Christianity into a kind of benign irrelevance. But this need not be the case. As the Middle East expert Fred Halliday has pointed out, one of the reasons that some young Muslims in Britain seem to be attracted to fundamentalist expressions of the faith is that they are caught between very conservative readings of their religion and a very liberal British society. But there is a third term missing here, which is the liberal strand within Islam. Young Muslims in Britain do not, generally, read the liberal Asian Muslims of the 19th and 20th centuries. They do not read Arab thinkers such as Ali Abdulrazaq; they are not aware that most people in an Islamic state such as Iran would have no time for most of the mullahs and fanatics in this country.
Halliday described at a recent round table how he was approached after a lecture in Birmingham by two young Muslim women in hijabs and asked whether it was true that in Islamic countries women were not allowed to be doctors and engineers, as they had been told this by the local fundamentalists. If they had lived in any of the 60 or so Muslim countries (with the exception of Afghanistan) they would know that this was nonsense.
But here they are squeezed between fundamentalist Islam on the one hand and the Daily Mail on the other.
 
 Discomfort of strangers (part one)
 
Britain in the 50s was a country stratified by class and region. But in most of its cities, suburbs, towns and villages there was a good chance of predicting the attitudes, even the behaviour, of the people living in your immediate neighbourhood.
In many parts of Britain today that is no longer true. The country has long since ceased to be Orwell's "family" (albeit with the wrong members in charge).
To some people this is a cause of regret and disorientation - a change that they associate with the growing incivility of modern urban life. To others it is a sign of the inevitable, and welcome, march of modernity. After three centuries of homogenisation through industrialisation, urbanisation, nation-building and war, the British have become freer and more varied. Fifty years of peace, wealth and mobility have allowed a greater diversity in lifestyles and values. To this "value diversity" has been added ethnic diversity through two big waves of immigration: the mainly Commonwealth immigration from the West Indies and Asia in the 1950s and 1960s, followed by asylum-driven migrants from Europe, Africa and the greater Middle East in the late 1990s.
The diversity, individualism and mobility that characterise developed economies - especially in the era of globalisation - mean that more of our lives is spent among strangers. Ever since the invention of agriculture 10,000 years ago, humans have been used to dealing with people from beyond their own extended kin groups. The difference now in a developed country such as Britain is that we not only live among stranger citizens but we must share with them. We share public services and parts of our income in the welfare state, we share public spaces in towns and cities where we are squashed together on buses, trains and tubes, and we share in a democratic conversation - filtered by the media - about the collective choices we wish to make. All such acts of sharing are more smoothly and generously negotiated if we can take for granted a limited set of common values and assumptions. But as Britain becomes more diverse that common culture is being eroded.
And therein lies one of the central dilemmas of political life in developed societies: sharing and solidarity can conflict with diversity. This is an especially acute dilemma for progressives who want plenty of both solidarity (high social cohesion and generous welfare paid out of a progressive tax system) and diversity (equal respect for a wide range of peoples, values and ways of life). The tension between the two values is a reminder that serious politics is about trade-offs. It also suggests that the left's recent love affair with diversity may come at the expense of the values and even the people that it once championed.
It was the Conservative politician David Willetts who drew my attention to the "progressive dilemma". Speaking at a roundtable on welfare reform, he said: "The basis on which you can extract large sums of money in tax and pay it out in benefits is that most people think the recipients are people like themselves, facing difficulties that they themselves could face. If values become more diverse, if lifestyles become more differentiated, then it becomes more difficult to sustain the legitimacy of a universal risk-pooling welfare state. People ask: 'Why should I pay for them when they are doing things that I wouldn't do?' This is America versus Sweden. You can have a Swedish welfare state provided that you are a homogeneous society with intensely shared values. In the United States you have a very diverse, individualistic society where people feel fewer obligations to fellow citizens. Progressives want diversity, but they thereby undermine part of the moral consensus on which a large welfare state rests."
These words alerted me to how the progressive dilemma lurks beneath many aspects of current politics: national tax and redistribution policies; the asylum and immigration debate; development aid budgets; European Union integration and spending on the poorer southern and east European states; and even the tensions between America (built on political ideals and mass immigration) and Europe (based on nation states with core ethnic-linguistic solidarities).
Thinking about the conflict between solidarity and diversity is another way of asking a question as old as human society itself: who is my brother, with whom do I share mutual obligations? The traditional conservative, Burkean view is that our affinities ripple out from our families and localities to the nation, and not very far beyond. That view is pitted against a liberal universalist one that sees us in some sense equally obligated to all human beings, from Bolton to Burundi - an idea that is associated with the universalist aspects of Christianity and Islam, with Kantian universalism and with left-wing internationalism. Science is neutral in this dispute, or rather it stands on both sides of the argument. Evolutionary psychology stresses both the universality of most human traits and - through the notion of kin selection and reciprocal altruism - the instinct to favour our own. Social psychologists also argue that the tendency to perceive in-groups and out-groups, however ephemeral, is innate. In any case, Burkeans claim to have common sense on their side. They argue that we feel more comfortable with, and are readier to share with and sacrifice for, those with whom we have shared histories and similar values. To put it bluntly - most of us prefer our own kind.
The category "own kind", or in-group, will set alarm bells ringing in the minds of many readers. So it is worth stressing what preferring our own kind does not mean, even for a Burkean. It does not mean that we are necessarily hostile to other kinds or that we cannot empathise with outsiders. (There are those who do dislike other kinds, but in Britain they seem to be quite a small minority.) In complex societies, most of us belong simultaneously to many in-groups - family, profession, class, hobby, locality, nation - and an ability to move with ease between groups is a sign of maturity. An in-group is not, except in the case of families, a natural or biological category and the people who are deemed to belong to it can change quickly, as we saw so disastrously in Bosnia. Certainly, those we include in our in-group could be a pretty diverse crowd, especially in a city such as London.
Moreover, modern liberal societies cannot be based on a simple assertion of group identity - the very idea of the rule of law, of equal legal treatment for everyone regardless of religion, wealth, gender or ethnicity, conflicts with it. On the other hand, if you deny the assumption that humans are social, group-based primates with constraints, however imprecise, on their willingness to share, you find yourself having to defend some implausible positions: for example, that we should spend as much on development aid as on the NHS, or that Britain should have no immigration controls at all. The implicit "calculus of affinity" in media reporting of disasters is easily mocked - two dead Britons will get the same space as 200 Spaniards or 2,000 Somalis. Yet every day we make similar calculations in the distribution of our own resources. Even a well-off, liberal-minded Briton who already donates to charities will spend, say, £200 on a child's birthday party, knowing that such money could, in the right hands, save the life of a child in the third world. The extent of our obligation to those to whom we are not connected through either kinship or citizenship is in part a purely private, charitable decision. But it also has policy implications, and not just in the field of development aid. For example, significant NHS resources are spent each year on foreign visitors, especially in London. Many of us might agree in theory that the needs of desperate outsiders are often greater than our own. But we would object if our own parent or child received inferior treatment because of resources consumed by non-citizens.
Is it possible to reconcile these observations about human preferences with our increasingly open, fluid and value-diverse societies? At one level, yes. Our liberal democracies still work fairly well; indeed it is one of the achievements of modernity that people have learned to tolerate and share with people very unlike themselves. (Until the 20th century, today's welfare state would have been considered contrary to human nature.) On the other hand, the logic of solidarity, with its tendency to draw boundaries, and the logic of diversity, with its tendency to cross them, do at times pull apart. Thanks to the erosion of collective norms and identities, in particular of class and nation, and the recent surge of immigration into Europe, this may be such a time.
The modern idea of citizenship goes some way to accommodating the tension between solidarity and diversity. Citizenship is not an ethnic, blood-and-soil concept, but a more abstract political idea - implying equal legal, political and social rights (and duties) for people inhabiting a given national space. But citizenship is not just an abstract idea about rights and duties; for most of us it is something we do not choose but are born into - it arises out of a shared history, shared experiences and, often, shared suffering; as the American writer Alan Wolfe puts it: "Behind every citizen lies a graveyard."
Both aspects of citizenship imply a notion of mutual obligation. Critics have argued that this idea of national community is anachronistic - swept away by globalisation, individualism and migration - but it still has political resonance. When politicians talk about the "British people" they refer not just to a set of individuals with specific rights and duties, but to a group of people with a special commitment to one another. Membership of such a community implies acceptance of moral rules, however fuzzy, that underpin the laws and welfare systems of the state.
In the rhetoric of the modern liberal state, the glue of ethnicity ("people who look and talk like us") has been replaced with the glue of values ("people who think and behave like us"). But British values grow, in part, out of a specific history and even geography. Too rapid a change in the make-up of a community not only changes the present, it also, potentially, changes our link with the past. As Bob Rowthorn wrotein Prospect in February 2003, we may lose a sense of responsibility for our own history - the good things as well as the shameful things in it - if too many citizens no longer identify with it.
Is this a problem? Surely Britain in 2004 has become too diverse and complex to give expression to a common culture in the present, let alone the past. Diversity in this context is usually code for ethnic difference. But that is only one part of the diversity story, albeit the easiest to quantify and most emotionally charged. The progressive dilemma is also revealed in the value and generational rifts that emerged with such force in the 1960s. At the Prospect roundtable mentioned above, Patricia Hewitt, now secretary of state for trade and industry, recalled an example of generational conflict from her Leicester constituency. She was canvassing on a council estate when an elderly white couple saw her Labour rosette and one of them said: "We're not voting Labour - you hand taxpayers' money to our daughter." She apparently lived on a nearby estate, with three children all by different fathers, and her parents had cut her off (evidence that even close genetic ties do not always produce solidarity).
Greater diversity can produce real conflicts of values and interests, but it also generates unjustified fears. Exposure to a wider spread of lifestyles, plus more mobility and better education, has helped to combat some of those fears - a trend reinforced by popular culture and the expansion of higher education (graduates are notably more tolerant than non-graduates). There is less overt homophobia, sexism or racism (and much more racial intermarriage) in Britain than 30 years ago and racial discrimination is the most politically sensitive form of unfairness. But 31% of people still admit to being racially prejudiced. Researchers such as Isaac Marks at London's Institute of Psychiatry warn that it is not possible to neatly divide the population between a small group of xenophobes and the rest. Feelings of suspicion and hostility towards outsiders are latent in most of us.
The visibility of ethnic difference means that it often overshadows other forms of diversity. Changes in the ethnic composition of a city or neighbourhood can come to stand for the wider changes of modern life. Some expressions of racism, especially by old people, can be read as declarations of dismay at the passing of old ways of life (though this makes it no less unpleasant to be on the receiving end). The different appearance of many immigrants is an outward reminder that they are, at least initially, strangers. If welfare states demand that we pay into a common fund on which we can all draw at times of need, it is important that we feel that most people have made the same effort to be self-supporting and will not take advantage. We need to be reassured that strangers, especially those from other countries, have the same idea of reciprocity as we do. Absorbing outsiders into a community that is worthy of the name takes time.
Negotiating the tension between solidarity and diversity is at the heart of politics. But both left and right have, for different reasons, downplayed the issue. The left is reluctant to acknowledge a conflict between values it cherishes; it is ready to stress the erosion of community from "bad" forms of diversity, such as market individualism, but not from "good" forms of diversity, such as sexual freedom and immigration. And the right, in Britain at least, has sidestepped the conflict, partly because it is less interested in solidarity than the left, but also because it is still trying to prove that it is comfortable with diversity.
But is there any hard evidence that the progressive dilemma actually exists in the real world of political and social choices? In most EU states the percentage of GDP taken in tax is still at historically high levels, despite the increase in diversity of all kinds. Yet it is also true that Scandinavian countries with the biggest welfare states have been the most socially and ethnically homogeneous states in the west. By the same token, the welfare state has always been weaker in the individualistic, ethnically divided US compared with more homogeneous Europe. And the three bursts of welfarist legislation that the US did see - Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, Harry Truman's Fair Deal and Lyndon Johnson's Great Society - came during the long pause in mass immigration between the first world war and 1968. (They were also, clearly, a response to the depression and to two world wars.)
In their 2001 Harvard Institute of Economic Research paper "Why Doesn't the US Have a European-style Welfare State?", Alberto Alesina, Edward Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote argue that the answer is that too many people at the bottom of the pile in the US are black or Hispanic. Across the US as a whole, 70% of the population are non-Hispanic whites - but of those in poverty only 46% are non-Hispanic whites. So a disproportionate amount of tax income spent on welfare is going to minorities. The paper also finds that US states that are more ethnically fragmented than average spend less on social services. The authors conclude that Americans think of the poor as members of a different group, whereas Europeans still think of the poor as members of the same group. Robert Putnam, the analyst of social capital, has also found a link between high ethnic mix and low trust in the US. There is some British evidence supporting this link, too. Researchers at Mori found that the average level of satisfaction with local authorities declines steeply as the extent of ethnic fragmentation increases. Even allowing for the fact that areas of high ethnic mix tend to be poorer, Mori found that ethnic fractionalisation still had a substantial negative impact on attitudes to local government.
Finally, Sweden and Denmark may provide a social laboratory for the solidarity/diversity trade-off in the coming years. Starting from similar positions as homogeneous countries with high levels of redistribution, they have taken rather different approaches to immigration over the past few years. Although both countries place great stress on integrating outsiders, Sweden has adopted a moderately multicultural outlook. It has also adapted its economy somewhat, reducing job protection for older native males in order to create more low-wage jobs for immigrants in the public sector. About 12% of Swedes are now foreign-born, and it is expected that by 2015 about 25% of under-18s will be either foreign-born or the children of the foreign-born. This is a radical change and Sweden is adapting to it rather well. (The first clips of mourning Swedes after the murder of the foreign minister Anna Lindh were of crying immigrants expressing their sorrow in perfect Swedish.) But not all Swedes are happy about it.
Denmark has a more restrictive and "nativist" approach to immigration. Only 6% of the population is foreign-born, and native Danes enjoy superior welfare benefits to incomers. If the solidarity/diversity trade-off is a real one and current trends continue, then one would expect in, say, 20 years that Sweden will have a less redistributive welfare state than Denmark; or rather that Denmark will have a more developed two-tier welfare state with higher benefits for insiders, while Sweden will have a universal but less generous system.
What are the main objections, at least from the left, to this argument about solidarity and diversity? Multiculturalists stress Britain's multiple diversities, of class and region, that preceded recent waves of immigration. They also argue that all humans share similar needs and a common interest in ensuring that they are met with minimum conflict; this, they say, can now be done through human rights laws. And hostility to diversity, they conclude, is usually a form of "false consciousness".
Critics of the dilemma also say, rightly, that the moral norms underpinning a community need not be hard for outsiders to comply with: broad common standards of right and wrong, some agreement on the nature of marriage and the family, respect for law and some consensus about the role of religion in public life. Moreover, they add, there are places such as Canada (even Australia) that are happily combining European-style welfare with an officially multicultural politics. London, too, has American levels of ethnic diversity but is the most leftwing part of Britain.
In the autumn 2003 issue of the US magazine Dissent, two academics, Keith Banting and Will Kymlicka, show that there is no link between the adoption of multiculturalist policies in countries such as Canada, Sweden and Britain and the erosion of the welfare state.
But many of the policies they describe are either too technical (allowing dual citizenship) or too anodyne (the existence of a government body to consult minorities) to stimulate serious tax resistance. They also assume too swift a reaction to growing diversity - these are forces that take effect over decades, if not over generations.
Similarly, two British academics, Bhikhu Parekh and Ali Rattansi, have offered a critique of the solidarity v diversity thesis (partly in response to Prospect articles) that also assumes an implausibly rapid connection between social cause and effect. They argue that because the expansion of Britain's welfare state in the late 40s coincided with the first big wave of non-white immigration into Britain, ethnic diversity cannot be a drag on social solidarity. But the post-1945 welfare state was the result of at least 100 years of experience and agitation. The arrival of a small number of immigrants in the 40s and 50s was unlikely to have much bearing on that history. Parekh, Kymlicka and others also argue that labour movement strength, not ethnic homogeneity, is the best indicator of the size of a welfare state. But labour movements themselves are stronger where there are no significant religious or ethnic divisions. In any case, we are not concerned here with the formation of welfare states so much as with their continued flourishing today.
A further point made by the multiculturalists is more telling. They argue that a single national story is not a sound base for a common culture because it has always been contested by class, region and religion. In Britain, the left traces democracy back to the peasants' revolt, the right back to Magna Carta, and so on. But while that is true, it is also the case that these different stories refer to a shared history. This does not imply a single narrative or national identity any more than a husband and wife will describe their married life together in the same way. Nor does it mean that the stress on the binding force of a shared history (or historical institutions such as parliament) condemns immigrants to a second-class citizenship. Newcomers can and should adopt the history of their new country as well as, over time, contributing to it - moving from immigrant "them" to citizen "us". Helpfully, Britain's story includes, through empire, the story of many of our immigrant groups - empire soldiers, for example, fought in many of the wars that created modern Britain.
I would add a further qualification to the progressive dilemma. Attitudes to welfare have, for many people, become more instrumental: I pay so much in, the state gives me this in return. As we grow richer, the ties that used to bind workers together in a risk-pooling welfare state (first locally, later nationally) have loosened - "generosity" is more abstract and compulsory, a matter of enlightened self-interest rather than mutual obligation. Moreover, welfare is less redistributive than most people imagine - most of the tax paid out by citizens comes back to them in one form or another so the amount of the average person's income going to someone they might consider undeserving is small. This, however, does little to allay anxieties based on perceptions rather than fiscal truths. And poor whites, who have relatively little, are more likely to resent even small transfers compared with those on higher incomes.
Despite these qualifications, it still seems to me that those who value solidarity should take care that it is not eroded by a refusal to acknowledge the constraints upon it. The politician who has recently laid most stress on those constraints, especially in relation to immigration, is the home secretary, David Blunkett. He has spoken about the need for more integration of some immigrant communities - especially Muslim ones - while continuing to welcome high levels of net immigration into Britain of over 150,000 a year.
Discomfort of strangers (part two)
 
Supporters of large-scale immigration now focus on the quantifiable economic benefits, appealing to the self-interest rather than the idealism of the host population. While it is true that some immigration is beneficial - neither the NHS nor the building industry could survive without it - many of the claimed benefits of mass immigration are challenged by economists such as Adair Turner and Richard Layard. It is clear, for example, that immigration is no long-term solution to an ageing population for the simple reason that immigrants grow old, too. Keeping the current age structure constant over the next 50 years, and assuming today's birth rate, would require 60m immigrants. Managing an ageing society requires a package of later retirement, rising productivity and limited immigration. Large-scale immigration of unskilled workers does allow native workers to bypass the dirtiest and least rewarding jobs but it also increases inequality, does little for per capita growth, and skews benefits in the host population to employers and the better-off.
But large-scale immigration, especially if it happens rapidly, is not just about economics; it is about those less tangible things to do with identity and mutual obligation - which have been eroded from other directions, too. It can also create real - as opposed to just imagined - conflicts of interest. One example is the immigration-related struggles over public housing in many of Britain's big cities in the 1970s and 1980s. In places such as London's East End, the right to a decent council house had always been regarded as part of the inheritance of the respectable working class.
When immigrants began to arrive in the 1960s they did not have the contacts to get on the housing list and so often ended up in low-quality private housing. Many people saw the injustice of this and decided to change the rules: henceforth the criterion of universal need came to supplant good contacts. So if a Bangladeshi couple with children were in poor accommodation they would qualify for a certain number of housing points, allowing them to jump ahead of young local white couples who had been on the list for years. This was, of course, unpopular with many whites. Similar clashes between group-based notions of justice and universally applied human rights are unavoidable in welfare states with increasingly diverse people.
The "thickest" solidarities are now often found among ethnic minority groups themselves in response to real or perceived discrimination. This can be another source of resentment for poor whites who look on enviously from their own fragmented neighbourhoods as minorities recreate some of the mutual support and sense of community that was once a feature of British working-class life. Paradoxically, it may be this erosion of feelings of mutuality among the white majority in Britain that has made it easier to absorb minorities. The degree of antagonism between groups is proportional to the degree of cooperation within groups. Relative to the other big European nations, the British sense of national culture and solidarity has arguably been rather weak - diluted by class, empire, the four different nations within the state, the north-south divide, and even the long shadow of American culture. That weakness of national solidarity, exemplified by the "stand-offishness" of suburban England, may have created a bulwark against extreme nationalism. We are more tolerant than, say, France because we don't care enough about each other to resent the arrival of the other.
When solidarity and diversity pull against each other, which side should public policy favour? Diversity can increasingly look after itself - the underlying drift of social and economic development favours it. Solidarity, on the other hand, thrives at times of adversity, hence its high point just after the second world war and its steady decline ever since as affluence, mobility, value diversity and (in some areas) immigration have loosened the ties of a common culture. Public policy should therefore tend to favour solidarity in four broad areas.
Immigration and asylum: about 9% of British residents are now from ethnic minorities, rising to almost one-third in London. On current trends about one-fifth of the population will come from an ethnic minority by 2050, albeit many of them fourth or fifth generation. Thanks to the race riots in northern English towns in 2001, the fear of radical Islam after 9/11, and anxieties about the rise in asylum-led immigration from the mid-1990s (exacerbated by the popular press), immigration has shot up the list of voter concerns, and according to Mori 56% of people (including 90% of poor whites and even a large minority of immigrants) now believe there are too many immigrants in Britain. This is thanks partly to the overburdened asylum system, which forces refugees onto welfare and prevents them from working legally for at least two years - a system calculated to provoke maximum hostility from ordinary Britons with their acute sensitivity to free riding. As soon as the system is under control and undeserving applicants are swiftly removed or redirected to legitimate migration channels, the ban on working should be reduced to six months or abolished. A properly managed asylum system will sharply reduce the heat in the whole race and immigration debate.
Immigrants come in all shapes and sizes. From the American banker or Indian software engineer to the Somali asylum seeker - from the most desirable to the most burdensome, at least in the short term. Immigrants who plan to stay should be encouraged to become Britons as far as that is compatible with holding on to some core aspects of their own culture. In return for learning the language, getting a job and paying taxes, and abiding by the laws and norms of the host society, immigrants must be given a stake in the system and incentives to become good citizens. (While it is desirable to increase minority participation at the higher end of the labour market, the use of quotas and affirmative action seems to have been counter-productive in the US.) Immigrants from the same place are bound to want to congregate together, but policy should try to prevent that consolidating into segregation across all the main areas of life: residence, school, workplace, church. In any case, the laissez faire approach of the postwar period in which ethnic minority citizens were not encouraged to join the common culture (although many did) should be buried. Citizenship ceremonies, language lessons and the mentoring of new citizens should help to create a British version of the old US melting pot. This third way on identity can be distinguished from the coercive assimilationism of the nationalist right, which rejects any element of foreign culture, and from multiculturalism, which rejects a common culture.
Is there a "tipping point" somewhere between Britain's 9% ethnic minority population and America's 30%, which creates a wholly different US-style society - with sharp ethnic divisions, a weak welfare state and low political participation? No one knows, but it is a plausible assumption. And for that tipping point to be avoided and for feelings of solidarity towards incomers not to be overstretched, it is important to reassure the majority that the system of entering the country and becoming a citizen is under control and that there is an honest debate about the scale, speed and kind of immigration. It is one thing to welcome smart, aspiring Indians or east Asians. However, it is not clear to many people why it is such a good idea to welcome people from poor parts of the developing world who have little experience of urbanisation, secularism or western values.
Welfare policy: a generous welfare state is not compatible with open borders and possibly not even with US-style mass immigration. Europe is not America. One of the reasons for the fragmentation and individualism of American life is that it is a vast country. In Europe, with its much higher population density and planning controls, the rules have to be different. We are condemned to share - the rich cannot ignore the poor, the indigenous cannot ignore the immigrant - but that does not mean people are always happy to share.
A universal, human rights-based approach to welfare ignores the fact that the rights claimed by one group do not automatically generate the obligation to accept them, or pay for them, on the part of another group - as we saw with the elderly couple in Leicester. If we want high tax and redistribution, especially with the especially with the extra welfare demands of an ageing population, then in a world of stranger citizens taxpayers need reassurance that their money is being spent on people for whose circumstances they would have some sympathy. For that reason, welfare should become more overtly conditional. The rules must be transparent and blind to ethnicity, religion, sexuality and so on, but not blind to behaviour. People who consistently break the rules of civilised behaviour should not receive unconditional benefits.
The "localisation" of more tax and redistribution would make it possible to see how and on whom our taxes are spent. More controversially, there is also a case - as Meghnad Desai has argued - for introducing a two-tier welfare system.
Purely economic migrants or certain kinds of refugees could be allowed temporary residence and the right to work (but not to vote) and be given access to only limited parts of the welfare state, while permanent migrants who make the effort to become citizens would get full access to welfare. A two-tier welfare state might reduce pressure on the asylum system and also help to deracialise citizenship - white middle-class bankers and Asian shopkeepers would have full British citizenship, while white Slovenian temporary workers would not. Such a two-tier system is emerging in Denmark.
Indeed, it already applies to some extent in Britain: migrants on work permits and spouses during the two-year probationary period cannot get most benefits. If we want to combine social solidarity with relatively high immigration, there is also a strong case for ID cards both on logistical grounds and as a badge of citizenship that transcends narrower group and ethnic loyalties.
Culture: good societies need places such as London and New York as well as the more homogeneous, stable, small and medium-size towns of middle Britain or the American midwest. But the emphasis, in culture and the media, should be on maintaining a single national conversation at a time when the viewing and listening public is becoming more fragmented. In Britain, that means strong support for the "social glue" role of the BBC. (The glue once provided by religion no longer works, and in any case cannot include immigrants of different faiths.) The teaching of multi-ethnic citizenship in schools is a welcome step.
But too many children leave school with no sense of the broad sweep of their national history. The teaching of British history, and in particular the history of the empire and of subsequent immigration into Britain, should be a central part of the school curriculum. At the same time, immigrants should be encouraged to become part of the British "we", even while bringing their own very different perspective on its formation.
Politics and language: multiculturalists argue that the binding power of the liberal nation state has been eroded from within by value diversity and from without by the arrival of immigrant communities with other loyalties. But the nation state remains irreplaceable as the site for democratic participation, and it is hard to imagine how else one can organise welfare states and redistribution except through national tax and public spending. Moreover, since the arrival of immigrant groups from non-liberal or illiberal cultures, it has become clear that to remain liberal the state may have to prescribe a clearer hierarchy of values. The US has tried to resolve the tension between liberalism and pluralism by developing a powerful national myth. Even if this were desirable in Britain, it is probably not possible to emulate. Indeed, the idea of fostering a common culture, in any strong sense, may no longer be possible either. One only has to try listing what the elements of a common culture might be to realise how hard it would be to legislate for. That does not mean that the idea must be abandoned; rather, it should inform public policy as an underlying assumption rather than a set of policies.
Immigration and welfare policies, for example, should be designed to reduce the fear of free riding, and the symbolic aspects of citizenship should be reinforced; they matter more in a society when tacit understandings and solidarities can no longer be taken for granted. Why not, for example, a British national holiday or a British state of the union address?
Lifestyle diversity and high immigration bring cultural and economic dynamism, but they can erode feelings of mutual obligation, reducing willingness to pay tax and even encouraging a retreat from the public domain. In the decades ahead, European politics itself may start to shift on this axis, with left and right being eclipsed by value-based culture wars and movements for and against diversity. Social democratic parties risk being torn apart in such circumstances, partly on class lines: recent British Social Attitudes reports have made it clear that the middle class and the working class increasingly converge on issues of tax and economic management, but diverge on diversity issues.
The anxieties triggered by the asylumseeker inflow into Britain now seem to be fading. But they are not just a media invention; a sharp economic downturn or a big inflow of east European workers after EU enlargement might easily call them up again. The progressive centre needs to think more clearly about these issues to avoid being engulfed by them. And to that end it must try to develop a new language in which to address the anxieties, one that transcends the thin and abstract language of universal rights on the one hand, and the defensive, nativist language of group identity on the other. Too often the language of liberal universalism that dominates public debate ignores the real affinities of place and people. These affinities are not obstacles to be overcome on the road to the good society; they are one of its foundation stones.
People will always favour their own families and communities; it is the task of a realistic liberalism to strive for a definition of community that is wide enough to include people from many different backgrounds, without being so wide as to become meaningless.
 
 Close the door before it's too late
 
Is it possible to be a progressive and yet have reservations about mass immigration? For labour market reasons, the left in America, and most African-Americans, have long been opposed to mass immigration, while the free-market right is now enthusiastically in favour.
In Britain, it has always been the other way round, although the old left-right lines are now starting to shift. It is more complex in Britain for two reasons. First, there is the residue of imperial guilt; we went out to their countries so it is somehow only fair that they come to ours. Second, because Britain is not an immigrant country in the way that America is, it is harder to set out arguments for limiting immigration without thereby seeming to project a negative image of those immigrants, especially from ethnic minorities, who are already here. Being pro-mass immigration is seen as a form of anti-racism.
That's why this debate will always, rightly, be a sensitive one for liberals. But, thanks in part to the lead given by David Blunkett, we now have a much more open and robust public argument than even 10 years ago (notwithstanding Trevor Phillips's shrill and defensive bid to close that debate down again in these pages on Monday).
I have recently had some direct experience of this openness. In the current issue of Prospect magazine, I wrote an essay on the potential conflict between diversity and social cohesion - the "progressive dilemma". It was not an essay on mass migration. It was, rather, a tentative exploration of the boundaries of people's willingness to share in modern welfare states. It looked at many kinds of diversity, not just ethnic diversity, nor was it a blunt appeal for the forward march of diversity to be halted. There was a question mark in the title, "Too Diverse?"
None the less, it did say that there is evidence for a negative correlation between ethnic diversity and generous welfare (at its most basic consider American welfare versus Scandinavian). And it did say that if we are not to wake up in 30 years' time and find we are a US-style society with sharp ethnic tension and a weak welfare state we need to be careful about numbers, speed and type of migrant; we need to worry about integration; we need to make sure that the poor are not disproportionately of a different race from the majority (as in the US); we need to reinforce the symbolic aspects of British citizenship; and we need to debate all this as openly as we might debate constitutional reform.
Given how much of the left's faith and energy since the end of socialism has been channelled into the cause of diversity, I expected to be howled down for these thoughts. Instead, my next issue will carry more than a dozen sober responses from some of the leading figures in this field: Bhikhu Parekh, Will Kymlicka, Sarah Spencer, Saskia Sassen, Kenan Malik and others.
Most of them disagreed with me, in several cases citing the Canada model as evidence that diversity and solidarity can happily coexist, (although it is worth recalling that Canada was multicultural from the start and has a highly selective immigration policy). Unlike Trevor Phillips's smear, no one said that I should "come clean" about my "real" racist motives for raising these issues.
Indeed, the irony of Phillips's attack is that he was denouncing me for an article in the Observer, the headline for which could have read "Keep the whites out". We are a European country of "managed migration", I argued, not a US-style society of "mass migration" and should therefore join the other EU states in not allowing an immediate "open door" to the citizens of the east European states that are joining the EU in May.
Most of the east Europeans are racially indistinguishable from white Britons. But an open door with countries at a significantly lower level of economic development and with much less generous welfare states risks too big an inflow too quickly. Why take the risk at a time when net immigration is already over 150,000 a year, there is great pressure on public services in the south-east, where most of them will come, and there is acute public anxiety (Britain's ethnic minorities included) about over-porous borders? If there are labour shortages, in Scotland for example, then we can offer work permits to any east Europeans who want to come - which is what the rest of the EU is doing.
But I wonder about those labour shortages. We have a great deal of hidden unemployment in Britain, remember the 3 million people on disability benefit? And London, where most migrants come, has unemployment of more than 7% alongside labour shortages. Let's think harder about sorting out those benefit traps that prevent existing Londoners, many of them black or Asian, from taking the jobs on offer before reaching out for the employer-friendly option of cheap foreign, white labour.
Migration is now much easier than it used to be, and millions of people would come to live in Britain if they were free to do so; the left must abandon a romantic attachment to open borders and acknowledge that too much openness threatens many of the values it most cherishes.
 
and Khalid Koser on immigration
 
Dear Khalid,
I remember feeling rather proud when I first read that Britain was going to be one of the few EU countries to offer an immediate "open door" to citizens of the new eastern European EU states.
Today I'm not so sure. My anxieties have not been aroused by stories about Slovakian gypsies, but rather by the growing belief that the costs of persistent high immigration are beginning to outweigh the obvious benefits.
A national community is a special thing, particularly in countries like Britain with highly developed welfare states where we share our resources with stranger-citizens. The economic and cultural benefits of high immigration must be balanced against the possible damage to feelings of solidarity that come from over-rapid change in the make up of the local or national community.
The east Europeans are only a small part of this story. Estimates vary, but it may be that only a few tens of thousands of them will arrive here after May 1st to work, to use our public services and to draw some of our benefits. But they will come to a country where there is already net immigration of more than 150,000 a year and acute public anxiety about over-porous borders. We should follow the other EU states and wait until the new members have risen closer to our economic level before opening the gates.
London, where most east Europeans will end up, has unemployment of more than 7% alongside labour shortages. Let's put more effort into sorting out the benefit traps that prevent existing Londoners taking those jobs before reaching for the employer-friendly option of cheap foreign workers.
Yours, David
Dear Khalid,
You are too sanguine. We are not managing the migration from eastern Europe, unlike the other EU states who are sticking to a work permit system for up to 7 years. We are crossing our fingers and hoping that 10,000 come not 100,000, but with unemployment in Poland at 20% and Slovak wages one-quarter the UK level we may be in for a shock.
The economics of migration is complex; there are benefits but there are also costs which tend to fall on the poorest. And the idea that immigration is the answer to an ageing society has been widely rubbished.
My bigger worry remains that if we take no account of the boundaries of people's willingness to share we will wake up in 20 years and find we have become a US-style society with sharp ethnic tension and a weak welfare state. The immigrant "them" can and does become the fellow citizen "us", but it doesn't happen overnight or when people fear that the state has only patchy control of the flow of people into their country.
Yours, David
Dear Khalid,
We do indeed share that frustration. Although I think, thanks to David Blunkett, we now have a more open debate than we used to. Perhaps in the long run we can combine diversity and solidarity in a way that America has failed to do. But to succeed we need to be careful about numbers, speed and type of migrant; we need to worry about integration; we need to make sure that the poor are not disproportionately of another race to the majority (as is the case in the US); and we need to debate all this as openly as we might debate constitutional reform.
I also hope that as the debate shifts away from race (the east Europeans we are talking about are white after all) to socio-economic questions of entitlement and the rights and duties of citizenship that the left will begin to acknowledge that too open a migration policy threatens many of the values it cherishes most. Thanks for a calm and level-headed discussion in a field that attracts so much self-righteous grand-standing, (yes, I mean you Yasmin!).
Yours, David
 
 Horns of the liberal dilemma
 
Just as anxieties about asylum-seekers seem to be fading, along come two events to stir up our acute sensitivity about migration into Britain. The first is the tragedy of the 19 Chinese who died while cockling in Morecambe Bay, providing a glimpse of the shadowy world of illegal immigrants. The second is the tabloid campaign against the Government's proposed 'open door' policy towards citizens of the east European countries joining the EU in May.
Many decent, liberal voices have been raised in protest against the Government's apparent capitulation to this tabloid campaign, which highlighted the large numbers of gypsies who might turn up and claim benefit. There is an even better liberal case for the Government's change of mind. Moreover, the public anxiety about mass migration, while in some cases fuelled by xenophobia or racism, is usually based on a rational understanding of the value of British citizenship and its incompatibility with over-porous borders.
The abstract language of globalisation and universal human rights risks blinding us to some basic truths about our society. The national community remains the basic unit of human political organisation and will remain so long into the future. And when politicians talk about this community or the 'British people', they refer not just to a set of individuals with specific rights and duties but to a group of people with a special commitment to one another.
Membership in such a community implies acceptance of moral rules, however fuzzy, which underpin the laws and welfare systems of the state. It also confers immense privileges - physical security, freedom of many kinds, the chance to flourish economically, free education, free health care, and welfare benefits if you cannot support yourself.
National citizenship is inherently exclusionary. We place our fellow citizens in Bolton before the people of Burundi, otherwise we would be spending as much on foreign aid as on the NHS, rather than one twenty-fifth of the sum. If everyone in the world was entitled to the benefits of British citizenship, as is sometimes implied by human rights law, our schools and hospitals would very swiftly collapse. They would also collapse pretty swiftly if Britain had an open-door migration policy.
We do have such an open-door policy towards people in other EU states, but relatively few citizens settle here because they live in societies at a broadly similar level of economic development. For the billions living on less than $1 a day, a place like Britain represents a kind of paradise, which is why so many people are prepared to risk their lives to get here.
Migration today is different from previous eras in two respects. First, it is a lot easier and cheaper for people in even relatively poor countries to get to the developed world. Second, European countries like Britain have highly developed welfare states which compel their citizens to share their resources with strangers to a degree unimaginable in previous ages.
Such welfare states were established when European states were much more homogeneous - in terms of life-styles, values and ethnicity - than today. Notwithstanding strong class and regional differences, those societies thought of themselves as extended kin groups, 'a family,' in Orwell's famous words about England, 'with the wrong members in charge'.
Fifty years of peace, wealth and mobility, plus two big waves of immigration, has created a very different Britain marked by much greater diversity of values and lifestyles. Some people, especially older people, regret the shift. Most people probably broadly welcome it.
Welcome or not, greater diversity almost by definition eats away at a common culture and feelings of mutual obligation, yet a strong common culture is required to sustain a generous welfare state. This is what I have described elsewhere as the 'progressive dilemma' (see the current issue of Prospect magazine).
The best summary of the dilemma has been given by Tory MP David Willetts: 'If values become more diverse, if lifestyles become more differentiated, then it becomes more difficult to sustain the legitimacy of a universal risk-pooling welfare state. People ask, "Why should I pay for them when they are doing things I wouldn't do?" This is America versus Sweden. You can have a Swedish welfare state provided that you are a homogeneous society with intensely shared values. In the US, you have a very diverse, individualistic society where people feel fewer obligations to fellow citizens. Progressives want diversity but they thereby undermine part of the moral consensus on which a large welfare state rests.'
The progressive dilemma lurks beneath many aspects of current politics: national tax and redistribution policies; EU integration and spending on the poorer southern and east European states; and even the tensions between America (built on political ideals and mass immigration) and Europe (based on nation states with core ethnic-linguistic solidarities).
It is also most painfully present in the debate about asylum and immigration. If welfare states demand that we pay into a common fund on which we can all draw at times of need, we need to be reassured that strangers, especially those from other countries and ethnic groups, have the same idea of reciprocity as we do.
Of course immigrants contribute, sometimes disproportionately, to the welfare state too. But public opinion tends to focus on the relatively small number, both immigrant and indigenous, who take out more than they put in. A recent Prospect /Mori poll asked, among other things, whether 'other people seem to get unfair priority over you when it comes to public services and state benefits?' Forty five per cent agreed that they did. It is a depressingly high figure which shows the anxiety people, especially among lower income groups, have about freeloading.
There seems to be something in the combination of relatively high personal taxation and the inability to see clearly where one's taxes are spent that makes people highly sensitised to being taken advantage of. Public policy sometimes makes matters worse: one of the reasons why asylum-seekers create such resentment is that the system currently bans them from legal work and forces them on to benefit for at least two years - it forces them to be 'freeloaders'.
There was also some good news hidden in our poll. When asked to name who they thought was getting unfair priority, 20 per cent named asylum-seekers and 19 per cent new immigrants. But Britain's established minorities - Asians and black people - were hardly mentioned. Absorbing outsiders into a community worthy of the name - turning the immigrant 'them' into the fellow citizen 'us' with whom we are willing to share - takes time, but it can be done.
It can be less easily done if a majority of people are troubled, as countless polls suggest they are, by the quantity, type and speed of immigration and if they believe that the Government has lost control of the flow of people into the country. That is why the Government is right to review the open-door policy to east Europeans. If hundreds of thousands were to arrive in a short space of time, it would stir up fears about migration in general, cause serious strains on the public services and hit those people at the bottom of the labour market (many immigrants themselves) hardest.
The government, understandably, wants to have it both ways on the migration debate. It wants to stress, rightly, the cultural and economic dynamism that comes with relatively high levels of immigration - and it celebrates the fact that roughly 200,000 legal immigrants come to Britain each year. But the Government is also aware that many of the costs of high immigration fall on poorer, white Britons. David Blunkett has bravely spoken up about the real conflicts that this can lead to and the need to shore up a common culture by better integration of some immigrant groups.
Taking a 'tough' line on asylum and immigration is not just pandering to the Daily Mail. It is a necessary condition of maintaining public confidence in a system of managed migration. How else might popular anxieties be answered? There is a case, as Meghnad Desai has argued, for introducing more 'two-tier' welfare, as is currently happening in Denmark. Certain kinds of migrants (the east Europeans, for example, for a transitional period) could be allowed residence and the right to work but access to only limited parts of the welfare state.
Such a two-tier welfare state might reduce pressure on the asylum system and also help to deracialise citizenship - white, middle-class bankers and Asian shopkeepers would have full British citizenship, while Slovenian temporary workers would not. If we want to combine social solidarity with relatively high immigration, there is also a case for ID cards on logistical grounds and as a badge of citizenship entitlement that transcends narrower group and ethnic loyalties.
Critics of the progressive dilemma thesis point to the fact that public spending and tax levels remain at historically high levels throughout Europe despite the big increase in diversity of all kinds over the past 30 years. That is true, but the sort of long-term decline in solidarity that I fear is likely to take decades to emerge. And if public policy takes no account of the boundaries of people's willingness to share we may wake up in a generation's time and find we have become a US-style society with sharp ethnic tension, a weak welfare state and low political participation.
You do not build a generous country by ignoring people's fears or pretending that they have the same affinities towards, or obligations to, a Slovakian gypsy as they do towards their own families, communities and fellow citizens.
 
 It's paranoia, not Islamophobia
 
Britain can take pride in how it has been trying to make a reality of political and legal equality for its 1.6 million Muslim citizens over recent years. Some Muslims still face forms of discrimination not faced by most other Britons, but many doors have swung open, especially since 1997.
Under Labour the first Muslims were elected to the House of Commons and appointed to the Lords. Muslim organisations lobbied for and won state funds for Muslim schools, a question in the census on religious faith, and criminalisation of religious hate crimes. The huge rise in public spending and focus on improving delivery in the poorest areas will have particularly benefited Muslims alongside other disadvantaged groups. And since 9/11 the government has sought out bright young Muslims for senior civil-service jobs and introduced innovations such as the hajj information unit for those making the pilgrimage to Mecca.
Privately, Muslim leaders will acknowledge this progress. But the overwhelming theme of public comment, even after the recent bombings, is one of Muslim grievance. Britain's Muslims are among the richest and freest in the world and most of them are groping successfully towards a hybrid British Muslim identity, but when did you last hear a Muslim leader say so? Iqbal Sacranie is a capable leader who has helped to turn the Muslim Council of Britain into an effective lobbying body, but his organisation's default position remains grievance. Here he is in the introduction to a recent booklet for British Muslims: "The unleashing of a virulent strain of Islamophobia, inflammatory media reporting and the misconceived wars against Afghanistan and Iraq have all contributed to the undoubted increase in prejudice we face."
There will, regrettably, be some backlash after the London bombs. But to glorify this with the term Islamophobia is silly. The respected science writer Kenan Malik has elsewhere (see Prospect, February 2005) examined the claims made in the name of Islamophobia (over stop and search, racist attacks and so on) and found them wanting. As for inflammatory media reporting - after 9/11 and even more so after 7/7 - all politicians and mainstream media voices have stressed the unrepresentativeness of the terrorists, and increasingly it is Muslim voices making this point, such as the hijab-wearing Sun columnist Anila Baig.
An undifferentiated rhetoric of grievance contributes to alienation, lack of integration and even indirectly to extremism. If you are constantly being told by even moderate Muslim leaders that Britain is a cesspit of Islamophobia and is running a colonial anti-Muslim foreign policy, you might well conclude, like one young Muslim quoted after the bombs: "I would like to give blood but they probably won't want mine."
According to an ICM poll in the Guardian last year, 13% of British Muslims thought the 9/11 attacks were justified, and according to other polls as many as 25% do not identify with Britain in any way. It is part of the job of moderate Muslim leaders to help to reduce those numbers as much as possible. To do that requires a change in rhetoric in at least three areas.
First, the relatively poor socioeconomic position of most British Muslims has little to do with Islamophobia or racism and a great deal to do with the fact that nearly two-thirds of British Muslims come from Pakistan and Bangladesh, often from these countries' poor, rural areas. (Indian and Arab Muslims do better.) The starting point in terms of education, skills and traditional cultural attitudes is worse for most Muslims than it is for, say, the Hindu or Chinese minorities, both of which outperform white Britons. To expect Muslims to rise to the average level in terms of education and jobs within a generation or two is not realistic, although progress is being made.
Second, the economic and political failure of many Muslim states - and subsequent western interventions - poses a challenge to all Muslims living in the west. But the crude "war against Islam" rhetoric of many British Muslims is just a feelgood rallying cry. How often do Muslim leaders point out that Tony Blair favoured ground-troop intervention on behalf of European Muslims in Bosnia and Kosovo? And as the Muslim peer Kishwer Falkner points out: "When Muslims are pressed to say what should have been done with a Taliban-run, al-Qaida-embracing Afghanistan, one is met with silence." Finally, how often is it pointed out that many of Britain's Shia Muslims welcomed the overthrow of Saddam, which has replaced secular dictatorship with Islamic democracy.
Third, the terrorist threat that Britain faces comes overwhelmingly from British or foreign Muslims; it does not come from Welsh hill farmers or US investment bankers. So it follows that most terror-related investigations will focus on Muslim communities. This isn't picking on Muslims; it is simply a fact of life.
A more open acknowledgment of these three points could help to move Muslim debate beyond the paranoia that often seems to characterise it and send an important signal to the rest of Britain that Muslims have risen above their grievance culture.
 
Britons need to rediscover the ties that bind |  
 
Britain is today experiencing a rerun of the 1970s social class stalemate when neither organised labour nor the establishment and broad middle class was strong enough to prevail – until the arrival of Margaret Thatcher in 1979. This time, the stand-off is between value groups – what I have called the people from Anywhere, the educated and mobile, and the people from Somewhere, the more rooted and conservative.
The Anywheres are only about 20-25% of the population but their progressive individualist policies, prioritising openness, autonomy and cognitive ability, have dominated politics for more than a generation and promoted, among other things, mass immigration and mass higher education.
Brexit was a backlash from the decent populist Somewheres, around half of the population, people who value stability, familiarity and more parochial group and national attachments and generally do not thrive in education driven economies.
The Anywheres then struck back at the last election—their political heartland, the seats (like Labour captures Canterbury and Sheffield Hallam) with a significant university and graduate presence, playing a decisive role in the outcome.
More than 15 months after the EU referendum, we seem to be edging from a strong Somewhere Brexit, prioritising lower immigration and full sovereignty, to a slightly weaker Anywhere Brexit, focusing more on trade. The party arithmetic in the Commons, and the vetoes that implies, has made it almost impossible for a government to take any bold initiatives that might help to unite the value groups, such as a truly radical housebuilding or social care initiative.
Both Anywhere and Somewhere worldviews are decent and legitimate and it is the task of politics to find a settlement in which both groups feel their core interests are respected. This is harder in Britain than in some other rich democracies because Anywhere and Somewhere personal networks diverge so radically thanks to our mainly residential universities and so many Anywhere careers get sucked into London.
Somewheres and Anywheres do not know each other because so many able, ambitious people invariably feel they have to leave their home town in order to live an achieved life. Consider this from Justine Greening, the education secretary, to the Social Mobility Commission, in which she speaks of “all the years I spent growing up in Rotherham where I was aiming for something better… a better job, owning my own home, an interesting career, a life that I found really challenging… I knew there was something better out there.”
Rotherham is not a one-horse town – it has 120,000 inhabitants and is 20 minutes from Sheffield. The Justine Greening story would not happen in Germany. There is no London, few global universities and a much greater stress on the local. The equivalent of Rotherham, say Gelsenkirchen, has a decent technical university that a German Greening could have gone to.
In Germany, there is also a legal voice for employees in business and a three-year apprenticeship system for the non-academic that confers respect on even basic jobs in, say, retailing. The Länder system gives many people a strong regional identity and dialect. Catholic Bavaria is the place in Europe where Anywheres and Somewheres co-exist most happily, with its mix of social conservatism and economic dynamism. It has been said that Anywheres regard society as a shop, while Somewheres regard it as a home. Bavaria is a home with some very good shops.
We cannot become Germany, so we have to find our own way of breaking the stalemate. What that requires, above all, is for Anywhere liberalism to become more pluralistic and emotionally intelligent.
As the children’s author David Lucas has written, we need the Anywhere values of diversity and freedom, but these are centrifugal virtues that do nothing to stop the atomisation of society. The centripetal virtues of duty, loyalty, respect for authority, responsibility for one’s own patch are largely left to Somewheres.
What is needed is a common project or a common threat to bind the interests of the two value groups. In the longer run, localism and environmentalism might be one. Somewheres care about their home in a concrete way, Anywhere greens in a more abstract manner – but they face the same way. Brexit cannot, alas, act as the common project when it is the point of division. But that could change. If the EU makes unfair demands and is demonstrably the cause of negotiation failure the vast majority of Brits could come together to make a success of our journey over that cliff edge.
 
Labour has lost its cultural connection with the people it claims to represent |  
 
When Labour loses an election there is a tendency on the left to first indulge in the wisdom of hindsight, and then to project the party’s failures eternally into the future. As I put money on an overall majority for the Tories and have the William Hill betting slip to prove it, I cannot be accused of the first. But the conviction that Labour can never win again is harder to resist. Just because it was so wrong in 1992 does not mean it is wrong now.
There is plenty of space for a social democratic party in Britain capable of speaking for two-thirds of the country or more, and able to appeal to both aspirational and left-behind voters. It is just very hard to see how Labour, with its current activists and MPs, could ever be that party. For it is the party’s inability to connect culturally with most British voters that lost it the election.
Leaving aside the issue of economic competence and Ed Miliband, it simply had no answer to nationalism in Scotland, Ukip English populism in the Midlands and the north (which in those areas gave it nearly 17% of the vote and 44 second places), and the free-market modernity of southern England.
Labour is a self-consciously progressive party dominated by highly educated people who tend to believe they see the world more clearly and understand people’s interests better than they do themselves – the default instinct of both the educated and the centre left. But this top-down political temperament and the wider worldview and language of the Labour activist barely overlaps any longer with the average voter. That voter has a hotch-potch of sometimes conflicting political feelings about the world, which might be summed up in Matthew d’Ancona’s phrase “individualism plus the NHS”.
He or she has a left or liberal side: most people oppose unjustified wealth and hierarchies (though might disagree about the definition of unjustified), are suspicious of authority, are comfortable with “abroad” and support equal rights (including for women and minorities). But he or she also has a conservative or communitarian side: most people are suspicious of change, want to live in stable communities, think people should take responsibility for themselves (and think today’s welfare system discourages them from doing so), want to live in relatively traditional families and, without being flag-waving nationalists, think that national citizen preference matters.
As the left v right spectrum has partly faded, commentators now talk about political views lining up along a libertarian v authoritarian, or an open v closed spectrum – but the latter distinction is just self-serving liberal propaganda. Nobody believes in a closed world.
Most people (including ethnic minorities) do want immigration to return to more moderate levels and think EU citizens should have to work for a few years before qualifying for tax credits or social housing, but they are modern “easyJet” people: socially conservative on some things and sort-of liberal on others.
A more relevant spectrum would highlight different emotional attitudes to change, mobility and belonging. Educated progressives and liberals tend to welcome change, are comfortable with mobility (their own and other people’s), and not especially bothered about belonging, indeed are suspicious of most group allegiances. Yet most voters are more likely to see change as loss and – without being sentimental for the often oppressive communities of 1950s Britain – want to live in relatively stable places with a high level of trust, low crime, and a degree of neighbourliness. And most people place the interests of fellow members of the local or national club before outsiders. This is the spectrum which finds most voters in a very different place from today’s Labour party.
On social mobility too, Labour’s graduate professionals seem to be saying: climb those ladders as we did. Of course, Labour should be on the side of ladder climbers, but it has been insufficiently sensitive to the shadow they cast over those who cannot or do not want to climb with them. Just as London can make the rest of the country feel inconsequential, so those who get to university and into the top part of the labour market can make those millions of decent, responsible people doing ordinary jobs feel like failures.
This is the dark side of meritocracy, and Labour should have thought far harder about how to mitigate it. As it was, the party had far more to say about universities than the continuing mess that is non-university post-school education and training. As Labour MPs Gloria De Piero and Jon Ashworth wrote in the Times after the election: “In the election, it looked like – so far as Labour was concerned – aspiration was just about going to university, hence our promise to cut tuition fees. But aspiration is also finding your children a place in a good school; getting your foot on the housing ladder; or starting a business or learning a new trade. These are becoming harder not easier, but Labour was not talking enough about them, let alone persuading people we had the answers.”
A country with a large group of strivers, but also decent pay and status for those who stay put and do basic jobs, is something that is becoming harder to achieve – both financially and psychologically – as the labour market and the education system increasingly divide into insiders (mobile professionals/graduates) and outsiders (immobile people without A-levels doing often basic jobs). This is a problem for all advanced countriesand for all political parties, but Labour should have made this aspect of inequality central to its story instead of fixating on the super-rich.
It is, however, no use just having the right policies to connect the aspirational and the left-behind. In several areas, such as welfare and immigration, Labour did have quite socially conservative policies – milder versions of the Tories’ own policies – but did not really believe in them or embody them. Embodiment is vital in today’s politics. As left v right arguments become more blurred, Labour needs a leader and a critical mass of activists who can embody social democracy with a provincial, socially conservative accent.
The election was a decisive vote against metropolitan liberalism – against mass immigration, further European integration, and the high-churn society that discomforts so many people. It was also a vote against London – the city that most represents those things. United against it were not just SNP and Ukip voters but many Tory and Labour ones. Yet London is Labour’s new heartland.
There has recently been much use of the famous Bertolt Brecht quote about dissolving the people and electing another. Labour has to do something similar – if not dissolve its current membership, then at least find a new set of leaders who connect culturally with the country it aspires to rule.
 
Why the left is wrong about immigration |  
 
In busy offices up and down the land some of Britain's most idealistic young men and women – working in human rights NGOs and immigration law firms – struggle every day to usher into this society as many people as possible from poor countries.
They are motivated by the admirable belief that all human lives are equally valuable. And like some of the older 1960s liberal baby boomers, who were reacting against the extreme nationalism of the first half of the 20th century, they seem to feel few national attachments. Indeed, they feel no less a commitment to the welfare of someone in Burundi than they do to a fellow citizen in Birmingham. Perhaps they even feel a greater commitment.
Charity used to begin at home. But the best fast-stream civil servants now want to work in DfID, the international development department. Their idealism is focused more on raising up the global poor or worrying about global warming than on sorting out Britain's social care system.
Many people on the left, indeed many Guardian readers, are sympathetic to these global citizen values: they see that the world has become smaller and more interdependent, and feel uneasy about policies that prioritise the interests of British citizens. The progressive assumption seems to be that it is fine to have an attachment to friends and family, and perhaps a neighbourhood or a city – "I'm proud to be a Londoner" – and, of course, to humanity as a whole. But the nation state – especially a once dominant one like Britain (above all its English core) – is considered something old-fashioned and illiberal, an irrational group attachment that smart people have grown out of.
Intellectual sophistication is, more generally, associated with transcending the local, the everyday, the parochial, and even the national. Replacing the nation with other allegiances seems an attractive, even morally superior, alternative – chiming with globalisation's market freedoms.
We have multiple identities and networks, both local and global, and our rights are protected by international human rights treaties – the nation state, as the political cliche has it, is too big for most of the local things that matter, too small for most of the big international things, such as climate change and nuclear proliferation.
The global citizen worldview also tends to be suspicious of communities. Or rather the idea of community is praised in the abstract but rejected in the particular in favour of a "cruise liner" theory of society in which people come together for a voyage but have no ongoing relationship. This individualistic view of society makes it hard for modern liberals to understand why people object to their communities being changed too rapidly by mass immigration – and what is not understood is easily painted as irrational or racist.
It also explains why this brand of liberalism is unmoved by worries about integration. If society is just a random collection of individuals, what is there to integrate into? In liberal societies, of course, immigrants do not have to completely abandon their own traditions, but there is such a thing as society, and if newcomers do not make some effort to join in it is harder for existing citizens to see them as part of the "imagined community". When that happens it weakens the bonds of solidarity and in the long run erodes the "emotional citizenship" required to sustain welfare states.
Many of my best friends, as they say – in business, academia and the arts – sign up to this global citizen worldview, a sort of mirror image of the strident chauvinism you often hear in rightwing politics and media. But I believe many of these "progressive" beliefs are not only wrong, but are unintentionally damaging to the goals of the social democratic left that many of them pursue.
Large-scale immigration from poor countries to rich is not the best way to achieve a more equal world or to help poor countries to develop. The young idealistic lawyer in the immigration law firm may believe that he or she is doing God's work, or the secular equivalent, but they are usually acting on behalf of a tiny sliver of the global population – the better-off, more mobile people in poor countries who, understandably enough, do not want to wait the several generations it might take for, say, Uganda to become a rich, stable, liberal country such as Britain. The idealistic lawyer is working in the face of the overwhelming opposition of his or her fellow British citizens and against the express wishes of most poor-country governments, who need to hold on to their most dynamic citizens.
Nor is bypassing nation states the route to better global governance. It is true that the world has become smaller and many of its biggest problems can only be solved with international co-operation, but it does not follow that the nation state is therefore powerless and irrelevant. Nations remain the building blocks of international co-operation and only they can bring democratic legitimacy to global governance.
The rhetoric of globalisation, by dwelling on those things that constantly flow across national borders – trade, finance, transport, media, immigrant diasporas – ends up painting a partial picture. (Most of the above are, in any case, still regulated by national laws or international agreements.) It also leaves out areas such as welfare, where the nation state is more enmeshed in people's lives than 50 years ago: think of tax credits. And, in 2008, in that most global of industries – finance – it suddenly became clear that it really matters which national taxpayers stand behind your bank.
Perhaps most important of all, the global citizen worldview misreads just how liberal most rich-nation states such as Britain have become. This is part of a bigger story about western values in the 20th century. In the mid-20th century, political elites in the liberal democratic west began to embrace what the sociologist Geoff Dench has called the "universalist shift" – the belief in the moral equality of all people. This went further than equality before the law and meant that differences of sex, class and, above all, race, were no longer obstacles to someone's full membership in a society. Although the idea did not extend to economic inequality, it was profoundly anti-hierarchical and demanded that power and rewards in society be justified by performance rather than inherited characteristics (such as whiteness or maleness or membership of a propertied class).
This political and legal egalitarianism was not new, but in earlier eras was a largely utopian idea associated with religion (we are all equal in the eyes of God) or radical political movements and Enlightenment philosophers. What brought this idea of moral equality into the mainstream? Two world wars, the Holocaust, anti-colonial movements and the stirrings of the civil rights movement in the US all combined to change human consciousness, at least in the developed world, in the mid-20th century. (Democracy itself was a factor too, with its equality of status within the community of citizens – one person, one vote – establishing itself in most rich countries only in the first part of the 20th century.)
After the publication of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the principle of moral and political equality came to be written into the constitutions and legal systems of all liberal democracies. Along with the American civil rights movement, it prompted, for example, Britain's pioneering anti-race-discrimination legislation of the mid-1960s. The moral and legal equality implied in the universalist shift was not always fully embraced in practice, but it became a standard against which to judge the behaviour of states; it was so used by the 1968-ers against authority in general, and against racism by the leaders of the first, post-colonial, immigrant generation in Britain.
It now seems so banal to believe in the moral equality of all people that we have forgotten what a novel and revolutionary notion it is, and how many people around the world still have traces of more racial and "groupist" worldviews.
All of us in mainstream politics in the developed world now believe in human equality. But too many progressive people have taken the universalist shift a step further – into a challenge to all national borders and loyalties. If all human lives are equally valuable, how can we any longer favour our fellow national citizens over the impoverished masses of the global south? This "post-nationalism" nags away at the conscience of many liberal-minded people.
But it is a category error. It does not follow from a belief in human equality that we have equal obligations to everyone on the planet. All people are equal but they are not all equal to us. Most people in Britain today accept the idea of human equality, but remain moral particularists and moderate nationalists, believing that we have a hierarchy of obligations starting with our family and rippling out via the nation state to the rest of humanity. Britain spends 25 times more every year on the NHS than on development aid. To most people, even people who think of themselves as internationalists, this represents a perfectly natural reflection of our layered obligations, but to a true universalist it must seem like a crime.
Many people on the left are still transfixed by the historic sins of nationalism. But if people are squeamish about the word "nation" they should use another: citizenship or just society. And the modern law-bound, liberal nation state is hardly a menacing political institution. You join automatically by birth (or by invitation) and an allegiance to the liberal nation state is compatible with being highly critical of the current social order and with support for bodies such as Nato and the EU.
Indeed, the modern nation state is the only institution that can currently offer what liberals, of both right and left, want: government accountability, cross-class and generational solidarity, and a sense of collective identification. As societies become more diverse, we need this glue of a national story more not less. This is ultimately a pragmatic argument. The nation state is not a good in itself, it is just the institutional arrangement that can deliver the democratic, welfare, and psychological outcomes that most people seem to want. It is possible that in the future more global or regional institutions might deliver these things; the EU is one prototype but its current difficulties underline what a slow and stuttering process this is likely to be. (Germany, the least nationalistic of the big European states, was happy to spend about $1tn on unification with east Germany but is very reluctant to spend much smaller sums supporting the southern European economies.)
Anti-nationalists also underestimate just how much the nation state has liberalised in recent decades. One might say that the great achievement of post-1945 politics, in Europe at least, has been to "feminise" the nation state.
The nation was once about defending or taking territory and about organised violence. But now that Britain's participation in a world war is highly improbable, the focus has switched to the internal sharing of resources within the nation – and the traditionally feminine "hearth and home" issues of protecting the young, old, disabled and poor. Notwithstanding recent trimming, Britain's social security budget has increased 40% in just the last 15 years.
The modern nation state has become far more inclusive in recent generations and is underpinned by unprecedented social provision, free to all insiders – but towards the outside world it has become, or is trying to become, more exclusionary. There is nothing perverse or mean-spirited about this. As the value of national citizenship in Britain has risen, so the bureaucracy of border controls has had to grow.
No one knows for sure how many people would come to live in a rich country like Britain if border controls were abolished. But in many poor parts of the world, in Africa in particular, there has been rapid urbanisation without industrialisation or economic growth or job creation. That has created a large surplus of urban labour well connected enough to know about the possibilities of life in the west and with a miserable enough life to want to get there. Who could say confidently that 5 million or 10 million people would not turn up in the space of a couple of years, especially to a country with the global connections that Britain already has?
The American academic Dani Rodrik plays a game with his economics students, asking them whether they would rather be poor in a rich country or rich in a poor country (where rich and poor refer to the top and bottom 10% of a country's income distribution). Most of them opt for being rich in a poor country. But they are wrong, at least if you just look at incomes. The poor in a rich country are, in fact, three times richer than the rich in a poor country, defined as that top 10% and not just the tiny number of the super-rich. That means our economic fortunes are primarily determined by what country we are born in and not by our position on the income scale. Being born in a country such as Britain, or being able to get here from a poor country, means winning the lottery of life.
It is hardly surprising that so many people are battering on our door to be allowed in. But allowing them in, at least in large numbers, not only creates conflict with poorer people in rich countries but slows down the development of poor countries.
A few countries, such as the Philippines, have become part-dependent on exporting people to rich countries and benefit in many ways from the process. But they are the exception. Most poor countries are actively hostile to permanent emigration. And it is hardly surprising. Desperately poor countries cannot afford to lose their most ambitious and expensively educated people. Phil Woolas, Labour's former immigration minister, recalls a meeting with the Sierra Leone foreign minister in 2008 in which she said: "Your country has just given me £150m to invest in infrastructure, and I am very grateful for that, but the trouble is that 90% of our graduates are in the US or Europe. Can you do anything about that for me?"
Emigration from poor to rich countries is obviously an economic benefit to the individuals and their families – a doctor from Ivory Coast will earn six times more in France, and a Chinese junior lecturer can earn five times more in Australia. And the cost of "brain drain" from poor countries is partly mitigated by the remittances sent home. Annual global remittances are about $160bn – more than twice foreign aid flows and a big chunk of GDP in some countries.
But just as rich countries can become over-dependent on immigration, which then reduces the incentive to improve the training or work ethic of hard-to-employ native citizens, so poorer countries can become over-dependent on emigration, which provides a flow of remittance money but slows the "take-off" to a more productive economy.
There is a particular concern over the importing of skilled health staff by rich countries. Malawi, for example, has lost more than half of its nursing staff to emigration over recent years, leaving just 336 nurses to serve a population of 12 million. Rates of perinatal mortality doubled from 1992 to 2000, a rise that is in part attributed to falling standards of medical care. Excluding Nigeria and South Africa, the average country in sub-Saharan Africa had 6.2 doctors per 100,000 of population in 2004. This compares with 166 in the UK, yet about 31% of doctors practising in the UK come from overseas, many from developing countries.
There is nothing morally objectionable about Britain refusing entry to skilled people from poor countries, or insisting that students or temporary workers from such countries return home after their visas expire. Indeed, if people return to their country of origin after a few years in a rich country it may produce the best outcome of all, a remittance flow followed by the return of a more skilled and worldly citizen eager for change. But this requires a reliable and well-funded immigration bureaucracy in Britain that commands public confidence – something that the UK Border Agency can only aspire to at present.
Rich countries should be saying: we will help you to grow faster and to hold on to your best people through appropriate trade and aid policies; we will also agree not to lure away your most skilled people, so long as you agree to take back your illegal immigrants (which many countries don't). The coalition government's combination of a lower immigration target and its exemption of the aid programme from cuts is an expression of this idea.
Another way in which a mutually beneficial "stay at home" policy might operate is by professional and academic bodies in rich countries encouraging more contact with counterparts in poor ones. Academic and professional exchanges and other forms of networking can help to reduce the isolation that many professionals in poor countries feel.
An asylum system that is too open can also have the unintended consequence of encouraging the most reform-minded people in semi-authoritarian countries to quit rather than stay and fight for change. When the UN Refugee Convention was established in 1951, the Soviet gulag was a reality and the Nazi genocide a recent memory. The convention currently states that anyone is entitled to asylum if they are being persecuted on grounds of "race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion". As Charles Clarke, the former Labour home secretary, has observed: "These are wide-ranging categories which, depending on your definition of persecution, probably cover hundreds of millions, if not billions, of people living in a world where international communications means that more and more people are aware of their 'rights' and seek to take them up." And human rights case law is gradually widening the definitions.
But many of the largest groups, such as Somalis, applying to enter Britain and other rich countries as refugees are not facing individual persecution but rather are caught up in regional conflicts or civil wars or even natural disasters. They have usually been granted "exceptional leave to remain" or what is now called "humanitarian protection". There is no reason why the leave to remain should be permanent. Civil wars and natural disasters come to an end and countries need rebuilding. Rich countries should try to provide shelter from the storm for people badly affected but then ensure they return to help that rebuilding. As it is, refugees are often dumped in the poor parts of rich western cities where they sometimes live segregated and unhappy lives and can become a long-term welfare burden.
I would guess that 95% of British people think policy should give priority to the interests of national citizens before outsiders should the two conflict, but that does not mean you cannot be an internationalist or think it's a valuable part of our tradition to give a haven to refugees.
A new progressive "stay at home" contract can still appeal to altruistic and charitable instincts in the west, but would work with, and not against, the majority interest in both rich and poor countries. Attracting so many of the world's brightest and best into cities such as London seems an oddly lopsided way of arranging global affairs. Surely it would be in the longer-term interests of rich countries and poor to spread development more evenly.
The bigger point here is the most basic insight of welfare economics. Just as the marginal extra pound is worth more to a poor person than to a rich person, so the educated and ambitious person is worth more to a poor country that has few of them than to a rich country that already has many.
Indeed, mass emigration from poor countries creates a kind of development distortion, the human equivalent of global trade and fiscal imbalances: the best-educated people leave countries that badly need them for rich countries that can certainly benefit from their arrival, but do not need them in any proper sense. Some lucky people end up speeding up the development process for themselves and their families while helping to slow it down for everyone else back home.
What's so idealistic about that?
 
Review: Reflections on the Revolution in Europe by Christopher Caldwell
 
Mass immigration into Europe in the past 50 years has profoundly changed the continent and is likely to change it even more over the next half century. Yet it is a subject so immersed in fear and wishful thinking that it often seems we still don't have a proper language in which to discuss it.
It is partly for this reason that Christopher Caldwell's new book, with the melodramatic title Reflections on the Revolution in Europe, will seem rather shocking to some readers of this newspaper. For he asks some unusually direct questions: can you have the same Europe with different people? Why did mass immigration happen when so few people actually wanted it? Immigrants want a better life but how many of them want a European life? Why is minority ethnic pride a virtue and European nationalism a sickness? Is political correctness just fear masquerading as tolerance?
As you can tell from those questions, the book is a sustained attack on the well-meaning liberalism that is still the dominant note in official immigration debates. Yet although Caldwell, a conservative American, believes that European immigration has not been a success, at least for the host societies, he is not anti-immigrant and says that he is a great supporter of the American melting pot. The book, or most of it, is written with the bemused but decent "native" European in mind.
Even if you disagree with his premises, Caldwell is worth persevering with because he is a bracing, clear-eyed analyst of European pieties. And that is partly because, as an American, he knows that mass immigration is not only compatible with a strong, confident, patriotic society, but may even require it. He can see Europe from the outside and has a genuinely pan-European view of the immigration issue, something rarely encountered in domestic commentary.
Caldwell cuts to shreds the conventional wisdom of the "immigrationist" ideology - the view that mass immigration is inevitable and in any case a necessary injection of youth into our ageing continent. He shows, contrary to the immigrationists, that the flows of recent decades are unprecedented. He also demolishes the economic and welfare- state arguments for mass immigration and points out that in most countries there was no desperate need for extra workers in the 1950s - in Britain's case, Ireland still provided a reserve army of labour. One of the most startling figures in the book is that the number of foreign residents in Germany rose from 3 million to 7.5 million between 1971 and 2000 but the number of employed foreigners stayed the same at 2 million.
Caldwell is at his best describing the confused cultural and intellectual condition of much of Europe at the time the first waves of immigrants were arriving. It was hard, he points out, to follow Europe's rules and embrace its values when Europeans themselves were rewriting those rules and reassessing those values. After the brutal experiences of the first part of the 20th century - two world wars, the Holocaust and de-colonisation - European elites had embraced a liberal universalism that declared the moral equality of all people and implicitly questioned the legitimacy of most racial and gender hierarchies.Liberal universalism could, in theory, have been compatible with confident nation states and national identities, but in practice it seldom was. The idea of national traditions and solidarities came to be scorned by liberals in many European countries.
Caldwell reverses the conventional argument, which says that if immigration has been a relative failure it is because the host society has been too hostile and unaccommodating. On the contrary, he argues, it is because most of the host societies were too weak and insecure to make newcomers an offer that was sufficiently confident to secure their loyalty and integration. Most European countries, constrained by liberal universalism and the immigrationism ideology, were simply too laissez-faire towards migrants. For the first time in modern history, European societies were set up to allow a big group of citizens to lead their lives as if in a foreign culture.
Caldwell somewhat overstates the case - surely the failures of European immigration can be attributed to both the hostility of the masses and the insecurity of the elites. But then he is not seeking to be balanced and reasonable. This is a declamatory, polemical work and no more so than in its treatment of Islam. In fact, the book is really two essays - one an insightful probing of Europe's confusion about postwar immigration; the other a rather cartoonish polemic about the potential Islamic takeover of Europe.
There obviously have been, and are, particular problems associated with the arrival into an increasingly secular and liberal Europe of large numbers of Muslims with a strong, often illiberal religious world-view. But Caldwell here abandons his clear-eyed reporting in favour of recycling a mild version of the neoconservative "Eurabia" thesis, which sees a decadent, irreligious Europe overrun by militant Islam.
He provocatively points out that there were fewer Bolsheviks in Russia in 1917 than there are Islamists in today's Europe. He also invites us to imagine that at the height of the cold war, Europe had received a mass inflow of immigrants from communist countries who were ambivalent about which side they supported. Again, it is fine to square up to the issue of Muslim commitment to national citizenship (one-third of British Muslims say they place their commitment to fellow Muslims before Britain) but to equate the war on terror with the cold war is outlandish.
In other areas, too, Caldwell has a tendency to heckle from the sidelines, rather than grapple with dilemmas. Yes, Europe did overestimate the need for migrants and underestimated the cultural and religious upheaval they would bring, especially those from outside Europe. But does Caldwell want to reverse the postwar liberal universalism and its associated playing down of national identity, which was partly inspired by the US itself? How do we in today's Europe nurture a sense of national belonging - and a sense of a collective "we" strong enough to sustain generous welfare states - that is compatible not only with mass immigration but also with the postmodern individualism that has been an even more striking feature of recent decades? Liberal nationalisms should not be built against the feelings of the majority, as elite-driven multiculturalism sometimes seems to be, but that in itself does not get us very far.
Moreover, Caldwell is far too sanguine about the US experience with race and immigration and does not seem aware that the idea of the "melting pot" has been under sustained attack in the US for decades. He is also too pessimistic about the UK and ignores, for example, the great success of Indians and Africans in climbing the professional ladder. And he is too ready to take official Jewish accounts of the return of anti-semitism at face value.
And yet, compared with most literature on migration, so often dull and cliché-ridden, this book pulsates with ideas: how the immigrationists cannot, logically, have both integration and their beloved diversity; how it was easier for migrants to integrate into factory economies than the more intimate service economies of today; how migrant disappointment can increase the less racist a country becomes as failure becomes more humiliating. Caldwell even proposes the startling theory that in modern "libertine" Europe, in which the search for sexual pleasure is increasingly paramount, the gap between haves and have-nots is reinforced (although this thesis could surely be reversed: beautiful, sexy poor people can now compete on more equal terms with ugly rich people - just don't be both poor and ugly in the modern west).
Caldwell quotes the French political philosopher Raymond Aron saying that "with humanity on the way to unification, inequality between peoples takes on the significance that inequality between classes once had". This applies within as well as between nation states and is another reason why the fallout from decades of mass immigration is, as Caldwell says, the most important problem facing Europe. And it is one which European democracy is handling with a striking lack of confidence.
 
 The baby-boomers finally see sense on immigration
 
Last week's green paper on immigration and citizenship used a rhetoric that would have been unthinkable 10 years ago. Jacqui Smith, the Home Secretary, talked about 'earned citizenship' and restricting certain welfare benefits to those who have achieved full citizenship, after at least six years 'on probation'. This is the same government that has overseen the biggest-ever migration into Britain and has been more positive about minority rights, multiculturalism and an 'open Britain' than any in our history. Grasping this apparent conflict requires an understanding of the learning curve of the liberal, baby-boom generation.
Most of today's cabinet were students in the 1970s and 1980s. If their student union had been debating the motion 'The nation-state is a bloodstained anachronism', most of them would probably have voted for it. And why not? I was there too and we were growing up in the shadow of nationalism's 20th-century horrors. Indeed, we liberal baby-boomers were children of a historic shift in Western political attitudes in which the ancient ideal of the moral equality of all humans came to be enshrined in both national and international law, most famously in the UN Declaration of Human Rights in 1948. Only 30 years before, a proposal that a clause on racial equality be included in the covenant of the League of Nations was rejected by all the major Western powers. Yet by the 1950s, after two world wars and the Holocaust, nationalism, at least in the West, had been partly discredited and the legitimacy of racial and even social hierarchies was shattered. For the first time, the idea of equal citizenship, both within and between countries, began to become a reality; indeed, it was one of the driving forces behind the generational upheaval of the 1960s.
In Britain, this idea of equality easily overlapped with a belief in a world without borders. Unlike 'year zero' nation states such as France and the US, Britain (England even more) always had a fuzzy sense of itself. And growing up in the 1970s and 1980s, the most coherent story about the nation was being told by people (from Monty Python to the Marxists) who disdained it. People on the left felt comfortable with the fuzziness and were pro-mass immigration - among other things it added colour to the staid stoicism of Anglo-Saxon life. Meanwhile, a broader political world view emerged - there was no common culture in Britain, but, rather, a multicultural ethnic rainbow.
Some variation on this view was embraced by most members of the current cabinet as students and young politicians. Which is why it is all the more remarkable that in the past eight years, Labour has created a new system of British national citizenship - from citizenship ceremonies to language tests and citizenship in schools, to last week's green paper introducing 'earned' citizenship.
Even in 1997, when Labour won power, this sort of language would have been taboo. Having conceded much of the economic argument to the right, a large part of Labour's appeal was that it was in tune with a multicultural Britain.
So why has Labour re-embraced borders? Why can Immigration Minister Liam Byrne accept that immigration might be too high, when five years ago even the populist David Blunkett apparently refused to contemplate any limit at all? Why is much of the liberal baby-boomer world view now in retreat across Europe? The fact is that the liberal baby-boomers were too insouciant about the nation-state and feelings of mutual obligation and belonging. Events, and voters' responses to them, forced them to adjust. In Britain, those events included the asylum crisis in the late 1990s, the unprecedented increase in legal immigration, the unexpected East European surge after May 2004, the 7 July London attacks and, most important, the hostility of public opinion to mass immigration amid anxieties about public services and rapidly changing communities.
This does not mean that the average British citizen has become more prejudiced, though the far right gets more votes than ever. The principle of anti-discrimination is now more widely practised than ever - remember the furore over Big Brother's Jade? And the average Briton is more comfortable with difference - consider the rise of interracial marriage. But the liberal baby-boomers have come to grasp that a belief in universal moral equality does not mean that we have the same obligations to all humans - we do not consider our families to be on a different moral plane, yet would not hesitate to put their interests first. Until a few decades ago, the basis of national 'specialness' would have been ethnicity - shared ancestry, history, sacrifice. In multi-ethnic and multiracial societies, the basis of specialness is citizenship itself.
The justification for giving priority to the interests of fellow citizens boils down to a pragmatic claim about the value of the nation-state. Without fellow-citizen favouritism, the nation-state ceases to have much meaning. And most of the things that liberals desire - democracy, redistribution, welfare states, human rights - only work when one can assume the shared norms and solidarities of national communities.
Labour has shed its baby-boomer inhibitions and come to accept that the interests of existing citizens (of all colours and creeds) must come first, including on the issue of immigration. But the reflexes of anti-national liberals remain influential; consider the Human Rights Act which, in certain key areas, confers the rights of citizenship on non-citizens, or the recent NHS doctors recruitment fiasco in which, at least initially, no preference was given to British citizens.
Even now, one can sense a certain nervousness when senior Labour figures talk about borders and limits. Indeed, the criticism of the green paper from the Tories is that there is not a word on limiting absolute numbers. Yet others point out that we have built our economy around the idea of a talent 'hub', based on internationally mobile sectors such as financial services and the creative industries, and if we now make it harder for people to come and go, we will damage our economic prospects.
So the government may not have got it completely right, but at least Labour has shed its naive universalism and accepted the harsh-sounding but obvious truth that for citizenship to be meaningful, it must exclude as well as include.
 
Day one: all in the mind
 
In all the millions of words written about Gordon Brown in the past two days one rather important one has been almost entirely absent: intellectual.
Yet, according to a survey in the current issue of Prospect magazine, Brown is the first /a> since AJ Balfour. That is admittedly using the rather narrow definition of someone who has written at least one scholarly book. But Brown also qualifies on the looser definition of someone who is extremely well read and interested in ideas. He is perhaps more accurately described as a political intellectual, or even a policy intellectual in the manner of Bill Clinton, rather than a pure intellectual. And despite his very public role he is certainly not a "public intellectual" in the normal sense - he is neither eloquent nor intellectually original and he is also a loner so there is no Brown doctrine or Brown school of thought.
But his bookishness and intellectualism will be an important part of the style of his premiership. His recent talk of a cabinet of all the talents and his offer of political office to various non-Labour people may have come as a surprise to those who have followed his actions only as a politician. But those who have been watching the range and eclecticism of his intellectual influences should have been less surprised. He has, for example, publicly enthused about the work of two American conservatives James Q Wilson (famous for his "broken windows" theory of crime) and Gertrude Himmelfarb. His interest in these two writers, and particularly Wilson, flows from an attractive desire to follow an intellectual quest wherever it will lead him. That quest has been for an account of what it is in human nature that makes people co-operative and what it is in human institutions that reinforces those dispositions. Wilson's book The Moral Sense is a carefully argued antidote to the simplicities of neoliberal individualism.
Apart from all the obvious intellectual influences on Brown - the Scottish Enlightenment, social democracy, his Church of Scotland upbringing - he is perhaps best identified as a member of that quite large group of former leftwing intellectuals who have not moved all the way to the right. He still holds to some of the core beliefs of moderate social democracy and still believes in the power of knowledge and ideas to change the world for the better. But in everything from economics (his favourite book on globalisation is by the free market FT commentator Martin Wolf) to personal morality (see James Q Wilson, above) Brown is now just as comfortable with thinkers of the centre and even the right.
Brown's intellectualism is practical - aimed at solving real world problems. How could it be otherwise for a politician? In some ways his strategic, rigorous mind has been perfectly suited to the Treasury where there are relatively few important decisions to be taken and they can be clearly seen coming up. It is possible that his style will be less suited to the daily pressures of No 10. None the less, as in his time at the Treasury, we are likely to have more government by commission and special inquiry and rather less by sofa and "instinct".
The fascinating thing to watch will be whether those commissions will be guided by Brown the intellectual, and therefore allowed relatively free reign, or Brown the politician who will ensure that the outcomes are known before they start their investigations.
 
A liberal dose of gloom
 
If you ask 100-plus contributors to a liberal-ish political magazine to write (briefly) about the future of politics - as we did at Prospect magazine this month - you should not expect to be cheered by the results. Nonetheless, I was somewhat taken aback by the relentless pessimism of most of the responses.
Not a single respondent mentioned the fact that on many objective indicators we are living in a golden age (global conflict has rarely been at a lower ebb, and global inequality is in steady decline thanks to the rise of China and India). And peering into the future most saw the death of democracy and/or liberalism as climate change and/or economic collapse ushered in a new Hobbesian age.
Why? Why does it seem so natural that a reasonably representative sample of the (mainly) liberal wing of the thinking classes should be so gloomy? One answer is simple enough. People who loosely belong to the intelligentsia usually think that to be serious and critical you need to be pessimistic, to play Cassandra against the conservative inertia of the consensus.
Yet that will not really work as an answer because the media consensus itself is so pessimistic. Perhaps there are local and time-specific factors in play. The fact, for example, that we are in the dog days of the Blair era - and those same liberals who naively believed that it would usher in a new political dawn are now wallowing in self-righteous disappointment. The fact, too, that the last few months have seen such a focus on the possible future ravages of climate change.
But the fact that the pessimistic outlook presented by climate change has been embraced with such relish still needs explanation, even if the prognosis is right. Moreover, most of our Prospect commentators belong to the baby-boom generation that grew up from the 1950s to 1970s. That generation should be the most optimistic in history: we looked back on the violent upheavals of the first half of the 20th century but enjoyed growing up in a new era that seemed to have learnt some of the lessons from that carnage.
We enjoyed rapid economic growth, we experienced the establishment of successful new international organisations like the European Union, we saw the end of deference and the establishment of a much deeper idea of equal citizenship, personal freedom and human rights, and we won the cold war too.
Yet instead of optimism we have a kind of European baby-boomer guilt - the feeling that we are the last privileged generation. And it is definitely a European thing - you do not find the same gloom in rising parts of the world or in the US. And if Europeans in general tend towards pessimism as a reflection of their reduced weight in the world, perhaps European intellectuals are even more pessimistic as a reflection of their reduced weight in their own societies too.
But perhaps we should draw some optimism from the pessimism of the British and European thinking classes. After all, 100 years ago the main emotion in politics was hope - and then look what happened. The despairing tone of some of these responses may be a sign that we are on the threshold of a period of unprecedented peace and prosperity.
 
Psyched out
 
So on top of all his other failings Tony Blair is responsible for driving us mad, says Oliver James, Britain's chief conveyor of political psychobabble.
James has "discovered" that citizens of English-speaking nations are twice as likely to suffer mental illness as ones from mainland western Europe. And he attributes this to the Anglo-Saxon model of competitive capitalism that Blair has encouraged rather than tamed.
Perhaps, in his book, he spells things out a bit more convincingly but this begs far too many questions. Does mental illness include relatively mild things like stress, anxiety, inability to sleep well? If so, perhaps the increasingly unbuttoned Brits are just happier to admit to such problems than the more stoical continentals.
More profoundly silly is James's foray into political economy. Who in Britain, let alone around Tony Blair, believes either that "consumption and market forces can meet human needs of almost every kind" or in the "suppression of unions". Unions have acquired considerably more rights since 1997 and Britain has become a somewhat less unequal country: Labour has introduced a high minimum wage, top-up pay for people on low incomes (tax credits), and spent vast sums on public services, sink estates and alleviating poverty.
Continental European managed capitalism IS an attractive model - as Timothy Garton Ash points out in the new issue of Prospect, the magazine I edit - and Britain under Blair has moved somewhat closer to it on several key measures, such as the proportion of GDP taken by the state and the amount spent on our free health service (average hours worked in Britain is also starting to fall). Indeed, there is a degree of convergence between the new Anglo-social model and the continental European models, which are becoming more liberal. (Incidentally, there is more absolute poverty in Sweden than in Britain, and in Sweden you also have to pay to visit your GP.)
Having said all that, James does have half a point. The Anglo-Saxon countries are, broadly speaking, more competitive and individualistic than western continental Europe. Compared with Britain, there is more structure and order in Germany (where I lived for three years), Sweden and Denmark, and probably rather less "status anxiety" than in the more fluid and mobile Anglo-Saxon lands.
But these cultural traits are deeply embedded - arising, in Britain's case, from the protection afforded by its island status which allowed for a weaker state and more individual freedom - and they will not be changed by banning company takeovers. Countries are not like cars: you cannot ignore the inheritance of centuries and drive off in a new direction.
Moreover, many of the good things and bad things about different national cultures are usually bound up together. The Anglo-Saxon countries tend to be more vibrant, less conformist, more open, more meritocratic (although not more equal), than continental European countries - but those things may make them less psychologically comfortable, especially for people of below-average ability.
Finally, James shares with many of the left-leaning happiness researchers a reluctance to acknowledge that the policy conclusions of many of their ideas are profoundly conservative. If social stability and greater cohesion are good, and competition and meritocracy are bad, then we would need to end mass immigration at once (as James's beloved Denmark has), make divorce a great deal harder and discourage people from trying to improve their status or wealth relative to their peers. A return, in other words, to 1950s Britain, when Old Etonians like Oliver James (and I) still ruled and everyone knew their place.
 
Going their own way
 
For most of the English political class the Scottish question was solved with the devolution settlement at the end of the 20th century. But that settlement is starting to look increasingly unstable. The Scottish parliament raised expectations that it has been unable to satisfy - and as the idea of abolishing it again is unthinkable the only possible move may be towards deeper devolution or full independence. A recent opinion poll found 51% of Scots supporting full independence.
Michael Fry, the rightwing Scottish historian, has now opened a new front in the independence debate by presenting a conservative case for breaking up Britain. Writing in the new issue of Prospect magazine, the former Scottish Conservative says that the real Scotland of staunch individualists and conservative Calvinists has been smothered by a politically correct public sector culture designed to keep the Scots cosseted and dependent. The only way to shake off this culture, which among other things is strangling the Scottish economy, is to move to full independence. The anomaly of a Conservative party that is anti-nationalist (at least in Scotland) and a Nationalist party that is to the left of the main centre-left party must end - and, he says, there are voices within the SNP now speaking out against the party's leftward drift.
Some of Fry's account does not sound plausible. Surely it is the Scottish centre-left which is disproportionately influential in both Scotland and England. And it is surely English grievance at Scottish political over-representation and its higher share of public spending which is more solidly based. Moreover, the idea that a statist social democracy is an external imposition from England will come as a surprise to generations of Scottish socialists. On the other hand there is something to the idea that Scottish independence has been sacrificed for the greater good of the British centre-left. It is widely assumed on the British left that the English would never on their own elect Labour governments to Westminster (despite the fact that Labour won a majority of English seats in each of the last three elections). So Britain needs left majorities in Scotland and Wales as a counter-weight to the neo-Thatcherite English majority, and to help keep the forces of nationalism at bay that has required political and economic sweetners, especially for Scotland.
Fry is also surely correct in his implicit assumption that Scottish Conservatism remains dead and he may well be right that embracing Scottish nationalism is the best way of reviving it. If Fry succeeds in converting many other Tories into SNP voters that will make it even more likely that the party will form the biggest party in the Scottish parliament after next May's election (just after the 300th anniversary of the union). The Scottish Lib Dems will reject a referendum on independence as a condition of joining a coalition. But what if the SNP are still the biggest party at the following election four years later? A referendum then might become inevitable, and there would be many more English voices cheering Scotland to the exit door than there would have been 15 years ago.
This is all another potential headache for Gordon Brown. But if something like it does start to happen the Scots and the English are going to have to think hard about what is the point of the British union. The recent success of the Irish model suggests to many Scots that independence earlier in the 20th century would have led to much greater prosperity and self-confidence. And would the losses to England from the end of the union be compensated for by having a less resentful neighbour to its north?
 
God's big comeback
 
You might not think it from the religion-dominated headlines in Britain over the past few weeks, but the secular tide is still rising across most of Europe.
If Eric Kaufmann's thesis in the latest issue of Prospect magazine is correct, however, that secular tide will turn over the next few decades and the demographic currents will start to carry Europe, even godless Britain, in the direction of America - the great exception to western secularisation.
This is not only because of the greater religiosity, and fertility, of recent immigrants (although that is an important part of the story). Even among long-established citizens the religious have always had larger families; secularism has historically advanced because of the high rate of religious abandonment. This religious abandonment is now starting to slow.
But secular liberals need not despair. Kaufmann is not predicting a resurgence of fundamentalism; in fact he predicts a continuing fall-off in religious attendance but an increase in mild religious belief. This may, indeed, represent a cultural "soft landing" in a country like Britain: the public culture will remain secular but there will be a greater respect for religious belief in general, helping perhaps to ease relations with the growing Muslim minority. There will also be a rowing back from some of the excesses of 1960s hedonism and a shift towards more socially conservative views, but without unravelling most of the liberalisation of the past 50 years. Altogether a very Anglican compromise.
But on the way to this soft landing we will not be able to avoid some pretty vigorous culture wars. Nor should we try. Moreover, if we are to avoid US-style racial and religious Balkanisation it is vital we have the argument now about, among other things, the degree of integration Britain expects from its fast-growing religious minorities. Jack Straw was right to open the veil debate. The recent media "avalanche" of Muslim-related anxieties is unfortunate, and will no doubt have caused discomfort to many Muslim Britons, but this avalanche effect is the price we are paying for our naivety and complacency about these matters over the past 20 to 30 years.
Critical mass matters. Not many people are bothered about a few thousand Hassidic Jews living separate lives in their enclaves in London or Manchester. Not many people are bothered now about a few thousand veiled women in Tower Hamlets or Bradford. But in 30 years' time Muslims will make up more than 10% of the population. If a significant minority of them are living the radically separate lives, so powerfully symbolised by veil-wearing, that will be a disaster for social solidarity.
 
The wrong dialectic
 
Danny Kruger, the new voice of David Cameron, has written an ambitious essay, The right dialectic, in the current issue of Prospect magazine seeking to give some philosophical bottom to the liberal-centrist drift of the new Tory party.
On first reading I found myself rather charmed by Kruger's attempt to claim "fraternity" for the Conservative cause. He argues, with some plausibility, that Labour too often confuses fraternity with its own default position of equality and thus allows the state to encroach too far into civil society, which should be the domain of "self-creating" fraternity. The Tories, by contrast, approaching fraternity from their own default position of the individual will, he says, allow civil society to flourish - this is the basis of the rather effective Cameronite soundbite: "there is such a thing as society, it's just not the same thing as the state."
On second reading I was not so convinced. My problem was summed up in this sentence: "... the right is reluctant for politics to get involved with society; it argues that fraternity is self-creating, that is consists of the voluntary associations of free individuals." I agree with Kruger that sometimes the left, even the moderate centre-left, crassly "politicises" too much of life. But he is surely guilty of the opposite mistake. Nowhere does this piece mention the intractable realities of power or class or capital or interests - it exists in a Hegelian dream world. Indeed, underlying it is the old conservative cliché that what is, and especially what is blessed by tradition, is good and natural and any tampering with it is bound to make things worse.
And what about fraternity itself? In an eloquent passage Kruger describes it like this: "Fraternity is the sphere of belonging, of membership, the sphere of identity and particularity. It exists in civil society, in the arena of commercial and social enterprise, of family and nation. It concerns neighbourhood, voluntary association, faith, and all the other elements of identity that relate us to some and distinguish us from others. It concerns culture ... Fraternity has always been the submerged object of politics, while the battle between equality and liberty raged overhead. Every time that politicians invoke 'community,' every time they celebrate 'tradition' or 'solidarity,' they are talking about fraternity. And yet there has been a general failure to admit or understand the place of fraternity in our politics."
Note how all notion of interests and conflict is spirited away from civil society despite the fact that it seems to include the entire private economy. Note also that neither here nor anywhere else in the 5,000 word essay does Kruger have any solution to the question of how our particular identities in the sphere of fraternity can combine together into some sort of collective national identity rather than fragment into separate, and even hostile, groupings. He politely dismisses as too statist Gordon Brown's "Britishness" rhetoric and my own attempts to develop an idea of "progressive nationalism" based, in part, on the enlightened self-interest of a generous welfare state. To the extent that Kruger does have an answer it is to say that there isn't a problem: "Britishness exists already, in the form successive generations have fashioned." This strain of utopianism is evident elsewhere too when, for example, communities (not individuals or the state) are said to be the key to solving problems of public services, the environment and crime. Or when political exhortation is held to be superior to law-making.
Kruger pokes fun at Labour's continuing addiction to the state and its encroachment into areas of culture and family life - and he scores a few points here. But much of his critique seems to be a function of the liberty, equality and fraternity triad he has chosen as his starting point. If one looks at the last 10 years in politics through the prism of public v private or state v market it is hard not be more impressed by Labour's break with its own past - its acceptance that there can be state failure as well as market failure, and its attempts (albeit not wholly successful) to create new institutions that blur the line between private and public.
Kruger sounds more plausible when he comes closer to particular policy debates. And he is surely right that localism in one form or another will be central to the new Tory appeal (although, needless to say, he has nothing to say about the problem of fiscal localism exacerbating inequality). But if this is the Tory big idea it should not - at least in its present form - give New Labour too much to worry about.
 
In defence of Tariq Ramadan
 
Last week Prospect magazine published a long interview with the Islamic scholar and reformer Tariq Ramadan. In the interview Ramadan talked in forthright terms about the importance of Muslims fully integrating into western countries, about the dangers of a Muslim "grievance" culture and about the crisis of authority across the Islamic world. He also spoke out for a non-literalist reading of Islamic texts to make the religion compatible with modern liberal norms.
What was the response? From reform minded Muslims it was mainly positive, welcoming the unusual clarity of Ramadan's intervention. From non-Muslims it has been much more cautious, verging on the hostile. As editor of Prospect (and one of Ramadan's interviewers) I have been accused by several people of naivety - of failing to see through Ramadan's apparent liberalism to his "true" beliefs.
Editor's mailbags are seldom representative and, thankfully, the British government is taking Ramadan at his word - he is currently topping the bill on a government - sponsored roadshow around Britain talking to young Muslims about their life and faith.
But why the depth of suspicion? Part of it seems to be genetic determinism: because Ramadan's grandfather was Hassan al Banna, the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, his critics assume that he must, deep-down, follow the Brotherhood's fundamentalist creed.
Moreover, there is no doubt that Ramadan's views have evolved over the years and he is a much more radical moderniser today than he was 15 years ago. In France the younger Ramadan is often quoted against the current Ramadan and there is a great deal of suspicion of both. This is based in part on the claim of a "double discourse", that he says one thing to non-Muslim liberals and something quite different to pious Muslim audiences.
It is true that Ramadan is a gradualist. He realizes that, partly because of his grandfather, he has a special place in Islamic discourse and he wants to take as many people as possible with him on a journey away from the insular, traditionalist reading of the faith - which in some cases is leading to extremism. Hence a few years ago he, controversially, called for a "moratorium" on the stoning of women for certain crimes in Islamic countries rather than an outright ban. He personally favours a ban but he knows that in many countries this is a minority view so he proposed a moratorium while scholars such as himself battled it out over the appropriate interpretation of the texts.
He is, in effect, a politician and like all politicians he customises his message somewhat to different audiences. But he angrily denies the accusation of saying significantly different things to Muslim and non-Muslim audiences and points out that he is banned from several Islamic countries for his liberal outspokenness.
Ramadan is no messiah. In his speaking, and even more his writing, he can be rather too fond of the obfuscating caveat (remember he is a philosopher by training). But he is prepared to engage with everyone from the militant group Hizb ut Tahrir to the ex-Muslim outcast Ayan Hirsi Ali. We need Tariq Ramadan, indeed we need many more Tariq Ramadans, if a true Euro-Islam is to take root.
 
New Labour's message is alarmingly divergent. But there is a third way
 
Last week I had the uncomfortable experience of sounding more nationalistic than Michael Portillo. In a short radio debate between us, Portillo not only abandoned the chauvinistic nationalism for which he was once famous, but appeared sceptical about any plan to revitalise British citizenship. I, by contrast, argued that a progressive nationalism is not an oxymoron and that if we want to preserve an open, liberal society with sufficient solidarity to underpin a generous welfare state, then voters need reassurance that the rights and entitlements associated with their citizenship are protected.
Portillo's shift is part of a larger pattern. Public opinion has been growing more polarised in recent years between, on the one hand, a cosmopolitan minority with a universalist, rights-based, post-national ideology that is comfortable in today's more fluid, pluralist society; and, on the other, a more traditional group that is sceptical about rapid change and more concerned with roots and reciprocity. In newspaper terms, it is the Guardian v the Sun.
Labour's problem is that both groups are part of its historic coalition. On the cosmopolitan side is much of the liberal middle class, and on the traditional side is a large part of the old working class. To try to accommodate both (as well as Britain's settled minorities, who occupy most points along the value spectrum), Labour rhetoric has swung, sometimes alarmingly, between the two poles - from celebrating mass immigration, "cool Britannia" and the Human Rights Act, to tough talking on crime, managed migration and ID cards.
Labour was ill prepared for the rise of the "security and identity" issues when it came to power in 1997. The famous "tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime" slogan and the "rights and duties" approach to citizenship signalled a reasonable attempt to combine liberal principles and tough-mindedness. But, unlike on the economy and tax-and-spend, Labour has found it hard to pull the home affairs policy strands into an effective policy narrative.
Creating a plausible "third way" for the security and identity issues - appealing to both the liberal and the anxious - is hard but not impossible. Contrary to the leftist caricature, those citizens who are anxious about rapid change are not all xenophobes; and contrary to the rightwing caricature, most reasonable liberals accept the need for national borders and for balancing individual rights against national security. Here are five general principles that this third way might start from.
Acknowledge conflicts, cool the temperature. Governments should be more honest about dilemmas - for example, how entrenched individual rights can make it harder for states to act effectively in the public interest - and debate them openly with the public.
The interests of British citizens, of all colours and creeds, must come first. This may seem obvious, but it often conflicts with the assumptions of the internationalist left, the business elite, and the xenophobic right (who refuse to recognise the non-indigenous as full citizens). We may have obligations to all humanity but we have a much more special relationship with fellow citizens. We need borders to protect that specialness. Even in a more interconnected world (and with our commitments to the EU), citizenship must exclude as well as include. Societies are not just collections of random individuals; national cultures are real things (however hard to describe) and need time to adapt to change.
The costs and benefits of immigration are very unevenly distributed. New citizens should be treated with fairness and helped to integrate. Existing citizens' interests count too, especially poorer ones who are most likely to lose out from immigration. There can be legitimate objections, as well as xenophobic ones, to a large number of newcomers arriving in a certain area. To ease the inevitable tensions between immigration and welfare states, benefits and even citizenship itself should, as far as possible, be seen to be "earned".
Individual rights have a collective and political context. Even after big events such as 7/7, due process must prevail; but, equally, unelected judges should at least take account of shifts in public opinion on where to strike the balance between individual rights and collective security.
Strong communities, local and national, are based on shared experience. Liberal, diverse societies are bad at generating such experience and sustaining collective identities. Without an inclusive national story there is a danger of Balkanisation, with people voting and identifying according to race and religion, rather than economic and social interests. Governments should lean against these trends.
The list is incomplete, but the main point is that value differences must not be allowed to split the centre-left coalition, as has happened in the US. That requires politicians to accept that a big part of modern politics is about marrying the twin, and sometimes conflicting, demands of tradition and modernity: the "particularist" commitment to specific norms and national traditions with the universalist, individual-rights culture of markets and law.
 
Don't abandon the Human Rights Act. Contest it
 
The government's standing on the Home Office issues (crime, immigration, homeland security) has been looking rather unsteady in recent weeks. But even before recent upsets it has had a political problem: it has talked tough - thus alienating the progressive middle class part of its historic coalition - but failed to convince people that it is achieving its goals - thus alienating its more traditional and working-class voters. (I believe that the liberal and the anxious can, in principle, be reconciled in a politics of "liberal realism" based on a robust defence of national citizenship, as I describe in the June issue of Prospect magazine out this week.)
The shrill response of some parts of the civil liberties lobby to the government's homeland security initiatives has helped to exacerbate the ideological polarisation. The default position of many civil libertarians is a deeply conservative (even chauvinistic) view that our existing common law practices and institutions are sacrosanct - implying that all those continental European countries that do not have jury trials but do have ID cards are significantly less free or liberal.
Laws and institutions have to adapt and respond to events. The current test for such adaptation is how the Human Rights Act (HRA) can be made to work in an atmosphere of heightened security anxiety and public hostility to extending the rights of British citizenship to foreigners who have committed misdemeanours. Before the European convention on human rights was passed into British law in 1998, human rights legislation acted as a backstop in cases of serious abuse. British citizens could still take cases to the Strasbourg court but it was a complex process used as a last resort. Now the convention acts as a more upfront veto on legislation. The ability to declare legislation incompatible with the HRA in the name of certain inviolable rights is a proper check on democracy, but it should not too easily pre-empt the decisions of elected politicians - especially when big events such as 7/7 require politicians to reflect a change in public mood.
The problem in Britain appears to be not so much the HRA itself but our legal culture, which not only has an honourable tradition of defending individual rights but has also developed, in the past couple of decades, an adversarial hostility to elected politicians. The judges have given the British government less benefit of the democratic doubt than their French or Italian counterparts.
Will Britain's judges shift in response to a shift in the public mood, especially on high-risk foreigners? Probably not, at least until someone blocked by the courts from deportation commits an atrocity. In the meantime, one answer to the tension between the HRA and national politicians over differing interpretations of national security is for governments to just take a tougher line. There is more wriggle room than the British government seems to appreciate and it should use it when it feels the judges' interpretation of the HRA endangers national security. That means fighting rulings to the bitter end, and as a last resort - after a free vote in the House of Commons? - refusing to comply with rulings, placing the onus on Strasbourg to throw Britain out of the convention.
 
Iraq: don't pull out, break up
 
Britain should not pull out of Iraq and allow it to dissolve into real civil war, as Michael Ancram has just suggested. We should instead help to break it up. The continued failure to form a government in Iraq shows that radical federalism is now the only long-term solution. Iraq's three main groups - Sunnis, Shias and Kurds - will have to agree to disagree and to lessen their claims on one another, acknowledging that 85 years after the British first tried to create it, the country still lacks the basis of a centralised European-style nation state. The belief that Saddam's brutality was the glue that held together the fragmented mosaic of Iraq has proved true.
As Gareth Stansfield argues in the latest issue of Prospect magazine, Iraq is already splintering: Erbil in the Kurdish north and Basra in the Shia south increasingly govern with little reference to Baghdad and there are reports of extensive population movements. Decentralisation is most developed in the north, where the Kurdistan regional government has recently concluded deals with DNO, a Norwegian oil company, implying that the regional rather than central government owns any new oil discoveries.
Last year's constitution is full of federal phrases, but there is no real agreement between the centralists (the Sunnis and the more nationalist, anti-Iranian Shias led by Moqtada al-Sadr) and the federalists (the Kurds and the SCIRI-supporting Shias) on the things that matter: oil, the role of the national parliament and the army.
Returning to a looser, federal country based on the three Ottoman provinces of Mosul, Baghdad and Basra does not mean partition - there is still a role for a reduced central state - but it does need very careful management. Stansfield argues that some of the alleged problems with radical federalism, such as an Iranian takeover of the south or a Turkish "veto", are not as serious as they seem. Turkey is heavily involved in the Kurdish north, both politically and economically, and could live with decentralisation. But there are tricky regional border disputes in the north, and many of the biggest cities, particularly Baghdad itself, have very mixed populations. Large Sunni and Shia groups might end up as restive minorities in powerful regions with governments hostile to their interests.
Despite these potential problems, the status quo is not working. The coalition could help to begin the process of disentanglement by revising its own objections to decentralisation. Yet Jack Straw, on his recent visit to Baghdad, refused to discuss with Kurdish officials the distribution of power between regions and the centre, and the British refuse to decentralise consular activities, such as the granting of British visas.
The British did not create Iraq, as is sometimes claimed. But we did, for our own imperial convenience, re-create it in the 1920s as a centralised state dominated by a Sunni minority. The best way we can now make amends is by coaxing the Sunnis and, more realistically, Moqtada al-Sadr, to accept a return to the status quo ante.
 
Learning to love invisibility
 
Gatherings of the European faithful are sombre affairs these days. At a recent Anglo-German conference in Oxford one of the first facts we were offered to reflect on was the Eurobarometer poll that found only 50% of all EU citizens believe that EU membership has been good for their country.
Almost everyone at the conference agreed that even in the founding EU states the old postwar idealism has little meaning today and that Europe must find a new story - it must reconnect with voters and deliver practical, visible benefits. One German Social Democrat talked about the EU providing an answer to peoples' anxieties on jobs and security; somebody else talked about an EU-wide programme to beat organised crime.
But there is a problem here that few pro-Europeans seem to grasp: Europe is a second-order institution. The main political reality now and for the foreseeable future remains national. (It cannot be repeated often enough how, come election time, almost all the things that British citizens really care about - tax and spend, the NHS, education, pensions, crime and antisocial behaviour, immigration and foreign policy - are still overwhelmingly determined at national level.) Most of the appeals for Europe to become more relevant - such as that from the German Social Democrat - would require a massive supranational intervention into welfare, social security and labour market policies that would be resented by almost all European voters, even German ones.
Where Europe is effective is mainly in behind the scenes measures of technical cooperation such as those on international trade or the single market. But these, by definition, have low visibility and thus low voter acknowledgement. If we do manage to produce an EU-wide programme to beat organised crime it will be a great achievement - doing just what Europe should be doing - but hardly anyone will notice it. And if they do notice it they will attribute the success to their national police forces or politicians who, being human, will not go out of their way to pass on the praise to Brussels.
The EU is a network of rather boring committees to which nation states delegate some sovereignty to help them run their economies and societies better. Yet the post-national rhetoric of European integration has clouded this reality - and both Europhiles and Europhobes have had an interest in exaggerating the importance of the EU. Europe has been over-sold and, as the "never again" idealism of the postwar period fades, it is now paying the price. Other countries are beginning to converge on almost British levels of Euroscepticism and their political classes are adopting what Tony Blair recently described, approvingly, as "practical scepticism" towards the European project.
The EU is more useful and necessary than ever before but it will remain largely invisible, even when it is working well, because political reality for European citizens remains primarily national. A small example of this was on display at my Oxford seminar when we turned our attention to Turkey and the EU. At the start of the debate the chairman asked the enlightened, internationally-minded, pro-Europeans in the room who was in favour of Turkish membership of the EU. All but one of the British delegates raised their hands. And who was against? All the Germans raised their hands.
 
The price of female progress
 
Social progress often comes at a price. And the emancipation of women is no exception. It is the mark of a confident, successful liberal society that it can acknowledge and face up to the negative consequences of social advance and put in place appropriate policies to mitigate them. Whether it is the loosening of social solidarity as a result of growing diversity, or the question of how to replace the "female altruism" that has been central to caring for the young and the old as women spend more time at work, politics can come up with solutions.
But first the problem has to be acknowledged. In the case of the negative consequences of female emancipation it is rare to find a hard-headed evaluation of the losses to society when women, especially educated ones, choose work over family. The newspapers are so full of stories about pay gaps and glass ceilings that sometimes they miss the bigger, and still remarkably recent, story: that for the first time in history women in developed societies have no career or occupation barred to them. Politicians, journalists and business people often stress the negative effects of losing half the country's best brains to the kitchen sink. And, of course, they are right to do so. The feminisation of the labour market, especially at the higher, professional end has brought enormous benefits. But it is striking how seldom anyone mentions, let alone tries to quantify, the offsetting losses when women choose work over family.
One of the reasons the female labour market story has appeared so unambiguously positive over recent decades is the buried assumption that women were not really doing anything of value when they were working mainly in the home. The American economist Shirley Burggraf has noted the strange alliance on this issue between feminists and market economists: the former see domestic labour as performed under patriarchal duress; the latter do not consider labour in the home at all because it is not paid and so does not contribute to GDP.
According to Alison Wolf, writing on this theme in the latest issue of Prospect magazine, it is simply "stupid" not to carefully analyse the losses from emancipation. Wolf is herself a professor at an elite university, so is hardly suggesting that the great advances in equality of the past 100 years should be rolled back. But she does point to three negative consequences of the advance of educated women.
First, and most familiar, is the impact of employment change on childbearing. We all know about the prospect of demographic decline, yet we ignore, sometimes wilfully, the extent to which educated women face disincentives to bear children.
Second is the death of sisterhood. In the past, women of all classes, in all societies, shared lives centred on explicitly female concerns. Today women divide into two groups. A minority of well-educated women have careers around which family life is built and they suffer little, if any, disadvantage at work associated with being a woman. A majority do jobs, usually part time, in order to bring in some extra money to the family, which remains their main priority.
Third, mentioned above, is the erosion of female altruism, the service ethos - usually underpinned by religious belief - which has been profoundly important to modern industrial societies, particularly in the education of their young and the care of their old and sick. The erosion of this service ethos, combined with the opening up of much greater opportunity for women in business and the professions has also had a negative impact on the public services and the voluntary sector. For 100 years, from the 1870s to the 1970s, the public services, above all education and healthcare, attracted the most able and energetic women of every generation. They had nowhere else to go; now they do.
We cannot, and do not want to, go back. But we have to acknowledge these losses before we can do anything about them.
Left without the facts
I have just read two interviews in small political magazines with grand oldish men of the intellectual left. One was with Stuart Hall, the other with Richard Sennett. Neither interview contained a single fact.
What's new? Both men are known for a broad brush approach to politics and culture and the interview form is not ideally designed for the communication of hard data. Moreover, Hall has been ill for several years and is unable to engage politically in the manner for which he has been justly celebrated over several decades. Nevertheless, when you angrily excoriate New Labour's version of the centre left and generally see the world as going to hell in a handcart - as both men do, especially Hall - it is, surely, not unreasonable to expect a wee bit of evidence for how frightful everything is.
Hall, sycophantically interviewed by Laurie Taylor (another grandish, oldish man of the left) in the New Humanist, comes out with some declaratory gems: "It has been New Labour's historic project to end the notion of the social as you and I understand it." Eh? Has Stuart not noticed the vast expansion of the state in the past few years, the doubling of NHS spending, the tax credits, the redistribution, the Sure Start programme, the billions sunk into urban regeneration. Isn't that quite "social". By all means tell us it's inadequate or not as good as it seems, or whatever, but to brush all this away with a melancholic shrug can only be persuasive to those who are already members of the same Frankfurt school cult of pessimism.
One of the things that is bugging Hall is, of course, competition and "privatisation" in the NHS (never mind that waiting lists have fallen by about two-thirds since 2001). Yet the one place that Hall singles out for praise in the interview is Sweden, which has introduced radical competition measures in its public services and is also rather a New Labour favourite.
Meanwhile, Richard Sennett interviewed in Renewal (the journal for embittered former Blairites) talks cloudily about the new culture of capitalism. I first came across his work on the new insecurity in the workplace when I was employment editor of the Financial Times in the early 90s. There was very little evidence for a sudden surge in insecurity then and there is even less today: the overall number of temporary jobs has actually been declining (it's been dropping sharply for women and rising slightly for men) and most new jobs are being created in the public sector which is heavily unionised and tends to be a relatively decent employer.
Richard can be an eloquent cultural critic but he seems under several odd illusions: that the New Labour officer class all come from upper middle-class backgrounds; that he knows the collective mind of the poorest people of Britain and that nobody has heard of Michael Young's The Rise of the Meritocracy (he talks about the problem of meritocracy as if it has just been discovered). When he does venture into the real world he drops a real clanger - claiming that German unions refused to represent Turkish workers. In fact the trade unions were among the few German institutions that did integrate Turks in the 60s and 70s, and several of the few Turks prominent in German public life have been senior union officials.
What's going on here? Why is it that left intellectuals seem to think that the facts get in the way of the story? Of course, all facts are partial, all facts have a context. But neither Hall nor Sennett are committed poststructuralists, neither would say all truth is relative. What seems to have happened is that the old left has so comprehensively lost the argument that it has given up trying to persuade anyone. If you are preaching to the converted you do not need any evidence.
Give me a policy wonk - someone who can tell me the movement of the Gini coefficient over the past 50 years or the take-up of tax credits among the poorest decile of the population - over the factless prophets. But, of course, it shouldn't be an either/or. I like the big picture as much as anyone, but I like it to be informed. Hall talks about being "a child of the Enlightenment". But the Enlightenment was about science and reason and challenging received belief through the presentation of facts and evidence. Hall and Sennett now speak like the priests of a secular religion who simply "know" that progress has come to a grinding halt.
Labour leadership: does it matter if the Left is unelectable?
 
 
Does Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour have a realistic chance of winning a General Election?  
The election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader ends a long period of cross-party consensus at Westminster. It has often been disguised by the noisy clash of adversarial politics but for the past 25 years differences between the two front benches have generally been a matter of nuance and emphasis rather than of underlying principle on economics, social policy and international affairs.
With Labour now led by an old-school socialist and dominated, at least for a while, by the outer fringes of the trade union and globalist left, the political atmosphere will become more shouty and aggressive and Corbyn will give a new lease of life to extra parliamentary protest of all kinds.
But there is no evidence that his election represents any significant shift in political opinion—a British version of Syriza in Greece or Podemos in Spain is not emerging. Corbyn’s hostility to the very gradual deficit reduction being pursued by this government does have some support in the country as does his support for the renationalisation of some utilities, especially railways, where public opinion remains unusually left-wing.
His worldview is a rare mix of economic statism and radical egalitarianism and a rather extreme version of the metropolitan liberalism that is generally hostile to tradition and suspicious of national borders. These views are shared by a tiny proportion of the voting public. (My own former accountant Richard Murphy is one of them: the tax/economics adviser to Corbyn is a middle class radical in a conservative profession who liked to represent artists and writers.)
And the young people who are flocking to the Corbyn banner seem to be mainly middle class, university educated idealists. They are not representative of British young people in general who are increasingly liberal on race, gender and sexuality but, if anything, shifting to the right on welfare issues and economics. The middle class youth also have very different concerns from the rump of the trade union left, which is Corbyn’s other main support group. This could be an interesting emerging tension in the Corbyn alliance. The youth have little sympathy for traditional working class concerns for community, place and family but can comfortably talk the language of identity politics and global rights.
 

In any case, Corbyn leads the Labour Party not as a result of any leftward shift in public opinion but because of a quirk of internal Labour politics at the end of the Blair/Brown era and the utterly uninspiring alternatives. A cleansing was long overdue but instead the party has indulged itself in a sort of Oedipal spasm chucking out not only the sterility and pragmatism of the New Labour era but the very idea of professional democratic politics itself.
Normal service will presumably be restored at some point though given the magnitude of his victory it is hard to see when. A semi-alien group of leftists now sit astride the party and will be able to direct its day-to-day positions in parliament and in responding to events but they will have to live with much of the policy inheritance from more centrist times. Some senior figures and activists may drift away in desperation to the Liberal Democrats but most will stay and fight, providing a permanent media story of internal Labour division.
At some point a new more electable leader will emerge for the non-Corbynites to rally around—Dan Jarvis maybe?—who will be able to triangulate his way to victory in the party and perhaps eventually in the country too (though it is hard to see that happening before 2025).
In the meantime does it matter if the main centre-left party is unelectable for almost a generation? There are, of course, other reasons for Labour’s predicament than Jeremy Corbyn, indeed his election is a symptom of the withering of mainstream social democracy experienced across all rich countries.
This decline has been well documented and has essentially three causes. First—and most visible—the changing class and industrial structure has largely eliminated the old industrial working class. Second, as touched on earlier, centre left parties have become increasingly divided between low income voters who often have quite traditional views on cultural matters and the increasingly dominant liberal middle class (public sector professionals and Guardian readers in the newspaper shorthand) who occupy the other end of the values spectrum on many of the biggest issues of the day such as immigration, welfare, Europe, family. This divided base is one of the reasons why so few Labour politicians have been able to speak with any conviction in recent years. Corbyn has not resolved the conflict he simply ignores it.
Third, and least discussed, is the notion that social democracy has been a victim of its own success. Social democratic ideas have become completely mainstream and, indeed, many have been adopted by the Conservative party: tough regulation of markets and industrial/regional policy is back in fashion after the financial crisis; support for a decent social safety net and free at the point of use NHS is shared across the spectrum (with some differences of emphasis); race, gender and sexuality equality is supported across the spectrum as, more recently, is support for reducing income inequality.
Ideas associated with the centre left will remain an important current in British public life even without Labour to implement them—consider the recent Conservative plans for a living wage and an apprenticeship levy on big companies. Centre left ideas are also institutionally entrenched in British society in much of the public sector, in the education system, in parts of the media.
The idea that without Labour as a contender for office to defend social democracy the malevolent Tories will grind the faces of the poor is just the sort of blinkered, tribal, self-regarding assumption that lost Labour the last general election and elected Jeremy Corbyn. It is true that an unelectable Labour party could strengthen the hand of the right wing inside the Conservative party but it may also strengthen the “one nation” left which could argue that the party has an even greater responsibility to try to speak for the whole country.
Finally, much has already been written about how Corbyn and his mainly wrong-headed ideas were able to seize the second great party of state only because of the failure of the hollowed-out Blair/Brown mainstream. That is undoubtedly true but there is something else that has helped Corbyn into the Labour leadership—the liberal baby-boomer student activist fallacy of activism being a good in itself.
One of the cliches of British political life in recent years is that it is in crisis due to low levels of participation. And it is that assumption that lay behind Labour’s eccentric decision to open its leadership election to anyone who paid £3 and agreed with the party’s values. As it happens, Corbyn would have won anyway, even without the registered supporters vote, but they gave him momentum and without them his victory would have been narrower.
It is true political parties have far fewer members and election turnout has been falling, though there seems to be a turnout floor of around 65 per cent. But British political culture is in rude health: consider the rise in recent years of the SNP and Ukip, the evolution of the Tory Party, the rise of mayors, a noisy and opinionated media. Politics may not have been good at solving problems—such as the Scotland/England relationship—but it is not clear that we need a “new” politics for that. And just consider the recent Assisted Dying bill debate: a country-wide discussion on a complex issue, hundreds of thousands of voices mobilised on both sides, a parliamentary decision and one which apparently goes against public opinion, suggesting the issue will be returned to in coming years.
One final observation. The great British public are due an apology from me and everyone else who writes about politics: we did not notice the complete transformation of the second largest political party in the country. If the figure given by Tom Baldwin (a leading adviser to Ed Miliband) is correct then only 10 per cent of the electorate who voted in the 2010 leadership election, were also eligible to vote in the 2015 election. This is remarkable and represents a significant failure of the commentariat.
I am even a member of the Labour party in Islington North, the constituency that elects Jeremy Corbyn to parliament every few years, and I did not have the first inkling that the Labour Party had become such a different creature in the last two or three years. But in mitigation: I am proud to say I did not vote for him at the general election.


How to close the door on an accidental mass migration
In the past decade Britain’s immigration policy has been a delicate balancing act. Governments have tried to reduce the inflow of migrants, as most voters wish. And they have sought to do so without handicapping the country’s universities, damaging its economy or – we must now add – leaving the EU.
So far, the coalition government has managed that balancing act pretty well. Contrary to the view that it is impossible to control immigration, the number of immigrants from outside the EU has been cut by about one-third since 2010. Yet there has been hardly a murmur of complaint from business and although universities have grumbled, their objections are largely unfounded (they continue to attract non-EU students in record numbers, about 300,000 a year). For a while it seemed possible to reduce net immigration to about 100,000 a year by the next election, as the Conservatives promised.
But then?lots of youngsters from southern Europe decided to up sticks, swapping the stagnant economies of the eurozone for the stronger currents of the British recovery. That meant an upward blip in net immigration. It boosted the insurgency of the populist UK Independence party. And it has given rise to speculation that David Cameron will demand the right to turn away workers from other EU countries in the run-up to the referendum on Britain’s membership that the prime minister has promised to hold in 2017 if he wins next year’s election.
What are we to make of this? Is Britain in the grip of a moral panic over a few Chinese students and Spanish nannies who pay us the compliment of visiting for a few years, to the benefit of many Brits and the wider economy?
The pro-immigration lobby says look at the facts and face down the xenophobes. But the economic facts are surprisingly neutral, pointing to modest advantages for the better-off and modest disadvantages for the less well-off.
The bigger objection cannot be refuted with facts. It is that inflows on the scale of recent years – non-British net immigration of nearly 5m since 1997 – are changing the country too fast for comfort. Large-scale immigration is primarily an issue of values, not economics. It is one that divides Britain’s two main value tribes.
On one side are the metropolitan liberals, who think change is generally good. They favour social and geographical mobility, regard individual autonomy and self-realisation as the goal of life and – although they are not full cosmopolitans – prefer their attachments to be wide-ranging, and thin. They are suspicious of group allegiances. They place equality before fraternity in politics (though not generally income equality).
On the other side are the communitarians, for whom change generally means loss. They place a high value on security and continuity, and their main goals revolve around human association. They think those close to us matter more than people who are far away. They place fraternity before equality in politics (but they believe in minority rights and race equality).
Most people have elements of both tribes in their outlook, but tend one way or the other. Metropolitans, of centre left and right, are outnumbered by communitarians – except among the mobile, university-educated professionals who run the country and hold sway in London. Communitarians are more likely to be from the suburbs or small towns, and are less likely to be highly educated.
This value divide is now just as useful as older categories – class, or the left-right distinction – in explaining British politics. It accounts for the current revolt on the right, and for Labour’s lassitude (its leaders are metropolitans but its core voters are communitarians). It also explains the divide over Europe. Metropolitans will trade sovereignty and control of borders for increases in wealth. Communitarians are not against all pooling of sovereignty, but they see borders as a matter of existential importance and believe citizens should have preferential rights over newcomers from abroad.
Will pent-up frustration among the communitarians, who have suffered years of condescension from the metropolitans, finally push Britain out of the EU? Not if Mr Cameron keeps a cool head. But he needs a strategy for reforming free movement that appeals to enough people in both tribes while keeping key European leaders on side.
The right of free movement for EU citizens was never supposed to herald mass migration from poorer countries to richer ones, such as the arrival of 1.5m eastern Europeans in Britain between 2004 and 2009. Nor is it sacrosanct. The rules have been revised frequently since the Treaty of Rome was signed in 1957. Only since 1991, for example, have you been able to move to another country without already having a job.
But it is the principle behind free movement – having to treat anyone from the EU as a full citizen after just a few weeks – that causes the greatest sense of unfairness, and not just in Britain. This is where reform efforts must focus.
The numerical quotas favoured by some of Mr Cameron’s advisers would be hard to enforce, and anyway they will never be agreed in Brussels. A better idea is to bar EU migrants from qualifying for entitlements such as welfare benefits and social housing until they have lived in the UK for, say, two years.
This would embed the principle of “earned citizenship” for newcomers. It would lead to some reduction in EU arrivals, especially among the 40 per cent who come without a job. Yet it could be sold to Britain’s EU partners as an evolutionary change to an admirable principle rather than a fundamental break with it.
Germany already has reservations about the ease of access to social security under the current arrangements. So have Austria, the Netherlands and Denmark. With skilful diplomacy, it should be possible to convert a majority of member states to the same view. And such a significant reform would surely enable Mr Cameron to outwit the rejectionists of Ukip and keep Britain in the EU.
Why the outrage? Theresa May was right on immigration - CapX
 
Theresa May yesterday made a rather technical speech about immigration that reiterated government policy about trying to reduce current levels (as supported by 80 per cent of the public) and made some interesting, albeit tentative, suggestions for reforming asylum policy.
And it brought the roof down. Inflammatory. Irresponsible. Mendacious. What is going on? There was the usual argument about the stats (does immigration reduce wages at the bottom? do too many students stay on after their courses?) on which I think May was broadly right, but the facts are fuzzy and reasonable people can disagree.
But I think there are two bigger reasons for the outrage—one because of what was said and the other because of what was not said. The one sentence—not expanded upon—that made some people very cross was this: “Because when immigration is too high, when the pace of change is too fast, it’s impossible to build a cohesive society.”
A bit sweeping perhaps but broadly true. I am director of the Demos Integration Hub (integrationhub.net) which pulls together on one website much of the relevant data on issues of ethnic minority integration and segregation. The Hub provides plenty of evidence of convergence on common norms and unselfconscious mixing across ethnicities in modern Britain. But there are also parts of the country marked by division and low trust across ethnic boundaries.
And even across the mainstream there is evidence of some divergence between the white British majority and minorities, in part because of the speed of change. Eric Kaufmann of Birkbeck College has done a ward analysis of the 2011 census and found that more than 40 per cent of visible minorities live in wards where the white British are a minority (sometimes a small minority)— the figure was only 25 per cent in 2001. In schools too the majority of ethnic minority pupils now go to schools where the white British are in a minority.
This is not the end of the world but they are trends that we should worry about and try to lean against. And that is even before considering the value divergence between those coming from more traditional, often Muslim, societies and the increasingly liberal British mainstream.
Answering May’s legitimate observation with celebratory rhetoric about multi-ethnic London (actually in many places a quite segregated city) is not good enough.
I think the second and maybe bigger reason for the shocked response to May’s speech is that she over-estimated her audience. She assumed that it is now possible to make a speech about immigration without having to prove you are not a xenophobe by first listing the historic benefits immigration has brought. She also assumed that the vast majority of British people are not angry nativists ready to turn on their minority neighbours if a politician talks about the problems created by large scale immigration. All the evidence suggests the average Brit has become more relaxed about difference and while wanting lower immigration feels no hostility to individual immigrants.
Immigration as a subject has always provoked political cross-dressing. People on the left who have inherited a pro mass immigration stance (largely because of the historic commitment to race equality) find themselves supporting big business’s interests in a plentiful supply of cheap and already-trained foreign labour. On the other hand Home Counties Tories with plummy accents talk earnestly about community cohesion in the inner city.
In the last few years Conservative immigration ministers have started to talk in explicitly social democratic terms about the economically regressive impact of large scale immigration. As a large scale immigration sceptic social democrat I welcome that and this approach now fits more easily into a wider social democratisation of Tory policy: living wage, training levy and so on.
The Tory claim to be the party of the working class, of all ethnicities, still seems to most people to be a bit of cheek. But it is certainly true of Tory immigration policy—as the chorus howling it down yesterday, led by the Institute of Directors, rather confirms.
Strangers in Our Midst by David Miller - review
 
 
When it comes to the refugee crisis we are constantly being exhorted to “look beyond the headlines” and think of the individual’s experience of displacement. Indeed, I am writing this on the BBC’s “World on the Move” day and I have been told this several times already this morning by various commentators.
Surely the problem is almost the opposite: our synapses are so flooded with emotion as we follow individual tales of suffering migrants in the media that we cannot think clearly about the issues we should be considering, such as the following.
Is the Syrian-led surge in refugee migration of 2015/2016 a blip — just a more dramatic version of the refugee surge following the Balkan wars in the Nineties? Or has something happened — in terms of information flows, the affluence of the new middle classes of poor countries, the opening of once-prison states like Iraq and Libya — to produce a permanent step-change in the numbers wanting to, and able to, come to Europe?
And are those many individual stories of risky journeys undertaken by ambitious young men from places such as Iraq, Afghanistan and Eritrea, contributing to a national narrative that says you can only thrive by leaving, so condemning those societies to stagnation?
You will not find the answer to those questions in David Miller’s new book, but the Oxford philosopher’s work is nonetheless a cool dissection of some of the main moral issues surrounding immigration and worth reading for its introductory chapter alone. Moreover, unlike many progressive intellectuals, Miller gives due weight to the rights and preferences of existing citizens and does not believe an immigrant has an automatic right to enter a country.
This is an academic work, and heavy going at times, but full of balanced judgments and tragic dilemmas. For example, the right to entry of genuine refugees must be weighed against the rights of those left behind who may suffer from the “brain drain” and the rights of existing citizens to some control over how their society changes. Miller calls himself a “weak cosmopolitan” — he supports the idea of the moral equality of all humans but does not think we have the same obligations to everyone — and he argues that this requires us to at least consider the claims of outsiders.
This is a bit vague, as he admits, but he is more robust on the importance of integration. “For immigrants to demand a full array of… equal opportunity measures while reserving the right to isolate themselves… in cultural enclaves is unacceptable.” Strong words for an Oxford academic.
He makes some useful observations about what can and cannot be demanded of newcomers and also about why, ultimately, integration matters: “[Because] we are disposed to sympathise with, help, trust, and take responsibility for those with whom we feel we have something in common.”
What he fails to consider is the fact that in Britain today we have a large minority population —especially people from central and eastern Europe — many of whom do not want or need to integrate. What then? He is also stridently resistant to the idea of two-tier citizenship, temporary citizens having fewer rights and entitlements, which may in the long run be the only way of making significant inflows acceptable to the majority.
When it comes to integrating immigrants, friendship is the key
How do you integrate newcomers, and even long-standing residents who continue to live apart, into British society? As a consequence of two factors – persistently high immigration and Islamic extremism – it is a question that is ever more urgently asked. Yet answers remain elusive.
On Monday, I am launching a new unit at the think tank Policy Exchange to inject some factual objectivity into these arguments and to try to make it easier to talk about ethno-cultural differences, in the same way that we talk about social class.
Objectivity is hard to achieve. There remains deep disagreement about the extent of the integration problem, how to deal with it, and even what the goal is and why it matters. Nevertheless, most reasonable people believe at least two things. First, it is a two-way process: both the host society and the incomer have to adapt, though the latter has to do so more. Second, there is a balance to be struck between accepting that people of similar backgrounds will want to cluster together and the belief that a good society requires some mixing and sharing across social and ethnic lines.
We must accept that people of similar backgrounds will want to cluster together
The news is not all bad. There has been an increase in mixed-race couples and children (though still little marrying out among South Asians); a gradual increase in cross-ethnic friendship; some decline in residential segregation (mainly driven by higher intra-minority mixing); and the emergence of a larger ethnic-minority middle class.
On the negative side, there is the indigestibility problem created by the speed and scale of recent immigration plus the extra tensions created by global Islamic extremism impacting upon an already somewhat segregated Muslim minority.
"Vanishingly few British people say they do not want someone from another race as a neighbour"
And there are two factoids that suggest there is a potential long-term “divergence” problem to be addressed. The first, from Eric Kaufmann’s work on the 2011 census, finds that 41 per cent of the non-white population (some 4.1 million people) live in wards where white Britons are a minority, in some cases a small minority. That figure was just 25 per cent in 2001.
The second, from the work of Simon Burgess, finds that more than half of ethnic-minority pupils in England are in schools where white British children are a minority. That rises to 60 per cent for those in Year One (and 90 per cent for those in Year One in London).
More than half of ethnic-minority pupils in England are in schools where white British children are a minority
Vanishingly few British people say they do not want someone from another race as a neighbour and only about 30 per cent of people say they would prefer to live in an area where everyone is from the same background. It is, however, clear from opinion surveys that people are hostile to legislation to promote mixing. Integration in a liberal society cannot be mandated by the government.
That does not mean legislation has no role. The law – everything from anti-discrimination law to rules governing marriage visas or the outlawing of FGM – can act as a weak integrationist force. But there are at least three other tools to promote it: nudge; the power of good examples; and public approval/disapproval.
The nudge potential is under-explored. Consider the minor adjustment to an online exam that helped eliminate the performance gap between white and ethnic-minority police recruits in Avon and Somerset.
"One appealing definition of an integrated society is one in which almost everyone is a potential friend"
What about good examples? In my book The British Dream I cite a primary school that experienced a sudden influx of Somali children, causing white parents to flee the school. The school called a parents’ meeting and explained how the new pupils would not hold back their children’s progress as they would be taught separately until their English was adequate. This stopped the exodus and the school is now one of the best in its area.
David Cameron has been showing the way on public approval/disapproval in recent days using his pulpit to raise the issue of teaching English to women who have lived here for decades and opposing the full-face Muslim veil without taking the French road to banning it.
This is about creating a more robust public conversation – respecting minority rights but not regarding some minority practices as above criticism. For example, the persistence of cousin marriage among some British Pakistanis is, as the Bradford Royal Infirmary has recorded, producing a large number of illnesses and disabilities. The dangers need to be more widely described and greater public efforts made to prevent the practice, short of making it illegal.
Cousin marriage amongst Pakistanis in Bradford is producing a large number of illnesses and disabilities
If I have one piece of advice for the Prime Minister’s “opportunity and integration” review headed by Louise Casey it is to focus on friendship. More mixed schools would help, maybe as part of a wider duty on local authorities to promote social and ethnic mixing (and to publish regular statistics on them).
For one appealing definition of an integrated society is one in which almost everyone is a potential friend: differences of race, class and religion are not obstacles to personal trust, loyalty and even intimacy between individuals of very different backgrounds.
We need an EU promotion. ‘Leader of the outer zone’ has a ring to it
 

So David Cameron had nothing up his sleeve when he finally revealed his EU negotiating hand last week. The familiar demands for protection for non-eurozone members, for more competition, for no longer being bound by “ever closer union” and for some adjustment to benefits for EU migrants were duly trotted out by the prime minister. It was all a bit underwhelming.
However, he does possess a secret weapon that remains unwrapped: framing Britain’s negotiation as creating a new role for itself as the leader, or shaper, of the “outer ring” of EU states.
Britain is neither by geography nor by history a core European state. For centuries we have been the offshore “balance of power” state, intervening to ensure no one becomes too powerful.
And today, by helping to carve out a more formal outer ring for those EU countries that value their national sovereignty more than “inner ring” countries, and that are more comfortable with liberal markets and lean towards Atlanticism in geopolitics, Britain is once again providing an alternative pole to a continental hegemony.
The most obvious way that Britain can do this is as shop steward for the nine non-eurozone countries pressing for formal safeguards for those outside the euro. By disentangling itself from the commitment to ever closer union, Britain can also open a new constitutional path that others may want to follow.
In the context of winning an EU referendum, how much better to be the main shaper of Europe’s outer ring than to be its foot-dragger-in-chief. It gives dignity and historical resonance to a position that will seem to many people a middle way between fully in and fully out — appealing to the mild Euroscepticism that is the centre ground of British opinion.
Moreover, Britain would be pushing at a partly open door. Variable geometry is an old idea whose time has come and most of our key EU partners — Germany above all — positively embrace the idea of a more flexible, differentiated EU with different levels of integration.
Indeed, most people in Brussels think Britain has so many opt-outs — from the euro, the Schengen border agreement, justice and home affairs legislation to the working time directive — that it already has a different quality of membership. Formalising that — adding whatever more flexibility Cameron wins in this negotiation — should be uncomplicated and make it possible for other EU members to enjoy all those things too.
The exact contours of the outer ring can be imagined in different ways but it would encompass most characteristics of the EU as it was before the euro. This would mean the single market in goods and services (including some majority voting), and some sovereignty pooling in trade, environment, energy, research and even aspects of foreign and security policy. Essentially, it means national democracies agreeing to cede sovereignty where there are demonstrable gains from doing so — a form of Europe that could spike the guns of its growing anti-EU forces.
What has changed to make this possible? Two things. Britain’s own position and the euro. Until quite recently Britain resisted a multi-speed Europe. Back in the mid-1990s John Major’s Britain said it wanted to be in the fast lane of Europe, but it was driving at 30mph with a queue of faster cars flashing their lights behind it.
Then the scale of the euro crisis made clear that it would require fundamentally different, and more integrated, economic arrangements for the eurozone. It also made clear to Britain that our national interest required a more integrated eurozone. Any residual reservations about being left behind were abandoned, and John Major’s car moved aside to allow the others to pass.
Metaphors, and the way issues are framed, matter enormously in politics. Yet as recently as his Bloomberg speech in 2013, which first proposed the referendum, Cameron praised EU diversity but dismissed the cluster of metaphors associated with it.
And metaphors do have to be handled with care. It remains important, for example, to avoid the implication of second-class or lower-status EU membership. For that reason, fast and slow lanes, higher and lower tiers, and, most recently, the idea of associate membership are all inferior to the more neutral (and geographically descriptive) image of inner and outer ring.
Metaphors can readjust the angle of view and help win arguments but they do not solve policy disputes. Even if the idea of inner and outer rings does prevail, it would leave unresolved many thorny issues for Britain’s continuing relationship with the rest of the EU — above all the nature of free movement and how to protect the City of London.
However, thinking of the EU as a series of rings raises intriguing possibilities —
a “thick” outer ring of countries such as Britain could be flanked by a “thin” outer ring for Norway, Switzerland, Iceland and even Turkey. Perhaps in the future countries could move between rings without too much difficulty. Greece might have felt more comfortable leaving the euro if there had been an established outer ring of the single market-plus to join.
Above all, with a referendum to win and the “outs” making the running, this is the obvious big idea for Britain, the idea that can give shape and grandeur to a European policy that too often seems like so much sniping and special pleading. An idea once scorned now holds the key to keeping us in the EU.
More Immigration Means Less Integration |   | Standpoint
 
I recently attended a conference about the refugee crisis. It was a serious gathering in a country house with many experts and a few people from the front line providing alarming glimpses of Europe’s southern and eastern borders — looking increasingly like Europe’s version of the Mexican-US border.
At several points during the two-day discussion the academics, NGOers and government officials talked about migration flows as if they were generals moving troops around the battlefield. There is, for example, a big youth bulge in the Western Balkans and in many of the 40 African cities with more than a million residents and, at the same time, several Western European countries have rapidly ageing populations. So, hey presto, argued several delegates, let’s make it easier for the former to move to the latter and we have a “win-win situation” if only European politicians would show political leadership: code for ignoring public opinion.
This idea appeared to have quite widespread support. Yet it blithely ignores the fact there is such a thing as society. Societies are not just random collections of individuals who happen to live in physical proximity and into which millions of people from elsewhere can be easily transplanted.
Successful societies are based on habits of cooperation, familiarity and trust and on bonds of language, history and culture. And if our European societies — so attractive to millions of refugees banging at the door — are to continue flourishing they need to retain some sense of mutual regard between anonymous citizens, which means keeping inflows to levels that allow people to be absorbed into that hard-to-define thing called a national culture or way of life.
Most people in Britain and the rest of Europe when faced with images of desperate people do feel compassion — many act on it as individuals by donating to charities and most of us want our governments to do something to alleviate the suffering. But there are also clear limits — both financial and emotional — to this compassion. Most of us want to be generous without encouraging further flows and without damaging our own country’s social and cultural infrastructure. High levels of regular immigration in recent years mean Britain is already struggling in some places to properly integrate incomers, especially those from more traditional societies.
This ought to be common sense, especially to the sort of politically engaged people at my conference who were mainly on the Left. Yet when it comes to immigration the Left abandons its normally communitarian instincts and becomes Thatcherite in its individualism. Why not another 500,000 desperate people? After all what is there to integrate into? We are all human beings, are we not? The universalism of the Left — based on its historic commitment to race equality — meets the “there is no such thing as society” individualism of the liberal Right.
But not only do we know that there is such a thing as society, we also know that good societies are characterised by high levels of trust and what social scientists call social capital. If immigration rises too sharply the result is likely to be reduced trust and familiarity, especially when the people arriving come from distant cultures; absorbing 100,000 Australians is very different to doing the same for 100,000 Afghans.
A less generous society is another danger. I first became interested in issues of race and immigration more than 10 years ago when I wrote an essay in Prospect, the magazine I then edited, entitled “Too Diverse?”, in which I pointed to the potential tension for the Left between its commitment to solidarity and community, on the one hand, and diversity and difference on the other.
The conflict can be managed, I argued, but that requires being careful about the scale and speed of immigration and giving some thought to integrating newcomers, so “they” became part of the “us” over time. If that does not happen, common norms are likely to weaken and along with it the precious idea of pooling resources with fellow citizens.
We do not all have to be the same, or have the same interests, to share a public space. After all, national social contracts and welfare states evolved in European societies that were sharply divided by class and region but a sense of national solidarity, of sharing a common fate, transcended those differences.
Ethnic differences too can be, and are, absorbed into the national “we” but it is not a simple or swift process. The academic evidence suggests that ethnically heterogeneous societies show lower levels of support for redistribution and thus in the longer run have weaker welfare states. This has long been evident in the US but is now emerging in Europe too.
There are two separate explanations for this, though they both have the same outcome. One is that migration has produced an “Americanisation” of European welfare by making poorer people less likely to support left-wing pro-redistribution parties (even though they benefit economically) because of concerns about culture and values often related to rapid ethnic change.
The second argument set out in a recent paper by David Rueda of Nuffield College, Oxford, challenges that account in favour of the claim — based on analysis of 15 European countries — that better-off people simply show less redistributive altruism in more ethnically diverse societies. That means poorer people from the ethnic majority have an economic interest in resisting too much diversity.
Such evidence underlines just how important it is to think clearly, and long-term, about the issues of integration — something barely mentioned in the current refugee debate.
That is easier said than done. Integration is a subjective and disputed idea. It is hard to define or measure, and therefore hard to say with any confidence when we have reached an adequately integrated society (and ethnicity is just one aspect of integration). The public conversation tends to grasp at passing events to declare Britain hopelessly divided (following, say, a terrorist act by a British-born Muslim) or one big happy family (when, for example, the charming British Bangladeshi, Nadiya Hussain, recently won The Great British Bake Off).
Moreover, most people, whether from an ethnic minority or the White British ethnic majority, tend to feel conflicted about the idea of integration. On the one hand we understand that we are not just individuals, that we come from groups with particular ways of speaking and thinking and behaving, and often feel most at home among people like ourselves, especially when we are first in a strange country; on the other hand we also grasp that a good society cannot consist of many inward-looking tribes living parallel lives with little mutual regard or common life.
Despite all these caveats it is reasonable to see convergence in life chances, and to a lesser extent in lived experience, between the largest ethnic groups as central to integration. This does not mean that everyone should be converging on lifestyle norms set by the White British majority — in any case in contemporary society those norms vary widely. It may, indeed, be easier to recognise integration by its opposite in the most segregated places. It should certainly be a cause for concern if some groups are diverging too far, especially in the “harder” quantifiable outcomes in economic life and education. And upward mobility for minorities is tougher if they are not connected to mainstream networks.
Recent decades have seen significant advances in the openness of British society and the decline of overt discrimination against minorities but in other respects integration has become if anything more problematic: the greater liberalism and individualism of British society means there are fewer national landmarks of shared allegiance to rally around, the scale and speed of recent immigration has significantly increased ethnic minority concentration in some areas making it easier to live separate from the mainstream (reinforced by media globalisation), and greater choice in schools and other public services makes it less likely that people will have shared experiences.
Some degree of ethnic clustering is the norm, especially when minority groups reach a certain critical mass, Poles in Boston, Lincs, for example, or where group institutions — such as mosques, halal shops and madrassas for Muslims — draw a minority together. One of the great policy questions of our times is how much separation is compatible with an open and healthily mixed society.
It is a question that the British state has not been much interested in answering. Unlike France, Britain recognises the existence and significance of ethnic groups (which is why we have the data to talk with some confidence about ethnic group outcomes) but it has not on the whole regarded it as part of its role to promote ethnic mixing. The policy over recent decades has been one of benign laissez-faire rather than a more interventionist “integrationism”.
In a liberal society that stresses choice and personal freedom there are, in any case, strict limits on the extent to which integration can be imposed. You cannot tell people where to live or where to send their children to school. In Britain there has never even been an official integration policy (except in a small way for refugees) or a minister for integration. The state has intervened to try to prevent discrimination but otherwise integration policy has existed only in speeches — from Roy Jenkins in 1966 to David Cameron in 2011. That changed in a small way after the 2001 race riots and 9/11 when Ted Cantle produced his report about ethnic division in some northern towns and advocated a more activist “community cohesion” policy. The New Labour government also emulated many other rich countries with significant immigrant inflows by introducing language and citizenship tests (and ceremonies) for new citizens.
But what occurs on the ground is only indirectly related to government policy. So what do we know about what is happening in today’s Britain? More than you might think. A few months ago I set up the Integration Hub, a website that pulls together all the relevant data and research relating to issues of integration and segregation (find it at integrationhub.net).
As you might expect it is a mixed picture. Most people from ethnic minority backgrounds identify as British and speak English as their main language. And in some places the laissez-faire approach has worked pretty well. If integration is in part “how far and fast they are becoming like us” (Professor Shamit Saggar) then at least in the harder objective measures of educational and economic outcomes several ethnic minorities have swiftly reached and then outperformed the White British average.
On the other hand certain other groups, including Pakistanis and Bangladeshis, Somalis and some Black Africans, continue to lag behind and/or to live somewhat more separately. Moreover the scale and speed of immigration in recent years seems to have created more separation in housing and schooling in certain areas at least between the White British and most visible minorities (who are mixing more among themselves).
To call this “white flight” makes it sound a more active rejection of mixing than it appears to be. Nonetheless, Eric Kaufmann of Birkbeck College, London, found from the 2011 census that more than 40 per cent of visible minority Brits live in wards where the White British are in a minority, in some cases a small minority. And the figure was only 25 per cent as recently as 2001. Partly as a result of that “drift to familiarity” a majority of ethnic minority school pupils now go to schools where the White British are in a minority.
Data cannot capture some of the most important, “lived” aspects of integration, though we describe what we know about peoples’ feelings in the Integration Hub chapter on attitudes and identity. Data may also conceal big differences. For example, a majority of households of South Asian ancestry continue to speak a language other than English at home. In some cases this will mean a high degree of separation and little contact with mainstream British life, but in other cases it will signify a confidently integrated bi-lingual/bi-cultural life with an ancestral language spoken within the family but English spoken fluently at work and among friends.
Integration is not an all-or-nothing thing. Many individuals, even large groups, are well integrated at work or in the wider culture but may remain quite residentially segregated, resisting the classic pattern of moving out of the inner city and dispersing into the suburbs.
There is also a complex relationship between integration and economic success. Some of the most integrated groups in terms of human relationships, such as British Caribbeans, are among the least successful minorities economically, and some highly successful British South Asians continue to live mainly monocultural lives.
Barriers to integration are broadly of three kinds: factors such as poor education, limited grasp of English and ignorance of cultural norms which generally fade with time; resistance to integration from the minority itself; resistance to integration from the majority. But integration is not something that just happens to people or groups. Different groups bring different attributes, cultural traits and strategies to the business of integration.
Ceri Peach, one of the most eminent academics in the field, has described an “Irish” strategy, which is essentially one of assimilation, and a “Jewish” strategy, which is about combining upward mobility with strong retention of cultural traditions. Successful South Asians have emulated the Jewish strategy.
Is there a special Muslim issue with integration? The short answer is yes. The main Muslim groups in Britain — Pakistani, Bangladeshi and Somali — tend to live more separately, are more likely to speak a language other than English at home, are least likely to marry “out”, and in the main still cleave to traditional norms that diverge significantly from an increasingly liberal mainstream, especially when it comes to religious piety, sexuality and gender roles.
Islamic extremism has understandably provided the focus of most government thinking and talking about integration/segregation issues in recent months and years. But there are some more positive signs too, suggesting that Muslims are just taking a bit longer than Hindu and Sikh South Asians to adapt to liberal Western ways. Surveys tell us that many adult Muslims, for example, still agree with the idea that men should go out to work and women should stay at home. But younger Muslim women now reject that view.
There are also signs that Bangladeshis are pulling away from Pakistanis in educational and employment outcomes. That is partly because Bangladeshis are over-represented in London, whereas Pakistanis are concentrated in the more segregated Midlands and North, and Bangladeshis are less likely to marry someone from “back home”, which almost half of Pakistanis still do.
Integration throws up some fundamental questions about how humans live. Are people (majorities and minorities alike) justified in wanting to live among their “own”? Is assimilation a good thing or a bad thing? Some analysts distinguish between good segregation and bad segregation. Bad segregation is segregation as an end in itself while good segregation — or what Trevor Phillips has called “cultural protection” — is about the minority mutual aid that may be necessary to launch oneself successfully into a new society, a temporary means to a more integrated end. 
And what about the longer-term trends? Will we grow more separate, especially if around one million, mainly Muslim, refugees find their way into Europe every year on top of high levels of legal immigration? Or as people become more educated and mobile will they draw their identities less from place and group and more from their own achievements, making them less concerned to maintain familiar and stable communities?
Getting the right balance on the integration of Britain’s ethnic minorities into mainstream British life is one of the most important public policy issues for the next generation. That is especially the case if we continue with the current historically high levels of immigration and if upheaval in the Islamic world continues to provide radical inspiration to some British-born Muslims.
There are no simple answers. We know that some groups tend to remain more separate for longer. We know that towns where a single minority dominates tend to experience worse segregation. We also know there is no appetite either from minorities or the white majority to legislate for more mixing. This is where nudging and the power of good examples — in pursuit of more ethnically mixed schools for example — are likely to be the most effective policy tools.
One of the first tasks over the next few years is to find an appropriate language to talk about these things more honestly and publicly than we have done in the past. The goal should be to talk about ethnicity as objectively and unemotionally as we generally do about social class.
There is such a thing as society and a good one requires a degree of trust and mutual recognition. Britain is still digesting the changes consequent upon the post-colonial immigration wave starting in the 1950s —sometimes happily, sometimes less so. If we were now to welcome large numbers of refugees on top of the regular inflows we would not only irrevocably change our society but also gradually erode some of the very things that attract them here in the first place.
Here's how to reform immigration to ensure better paid, better trained Britons
If we are clever, the new, post-Brexit, immigration system we are free to design can minimise European hostility and disruption to British business while reducing numbers significantly and righting some of the wrongs of the economy. More than 300,000 people are arriving every year for work. This scale of immigration is the consequence of decisions by thousands of employers in the private and public sector. Most employers are happy with the current arrangements. But has the average Briton benefited?
It is surely no coincidence that private sector investment in training has fallen sharply over the past 15 years. Employers have, in particular, invested far too little in the science, technology and IT skills of British citizens and then recruited tens of thousands from elsewhere.
It is not just the fault of employers. Governments have  encouraged as many kids as possible to take often second-rate, generalist university courses.  while allowing the institutions that produced the middling and higher skill base of industry and skilled trades to wither. And as long as the immigration crutch remains, the incentive for employers to invest more in training and governments to think hard about how to increase the prestige of technical and vocational education remains limited.
Consider nursing. We recruit thousands of nurses every year from the EU and beyond. This is usually cited as a benefit of a relatively open immigration system. But why is it happening? Partly because the number of training places fell by 20 per cent between 2010 and 2013, but also because nurses’ pay has slipped back. There was a severe shortage of nurses in the late 1990s and early 2000s and the Pay Review Body responded with big increases and the problem was temporarily solved.
This time, according to Professor David Metcalf, chairman of the Migration Advisory Committee, it is Department of Health inaction that lies behind the increase in immigration. He has very reluctantly agreed to place nurses on the Shortage Occupation List at the department’s request despite the fact that tens of thousands of Britons would like a nursing career if it offered slightly better prospects.
Responding to the overwhelming popular demand to reduce immigration, especially low-skill immigration from Europe, is compatible with a thriving economy so long as we adapt our behaviour on training, pay and public spending.
The Government can help by making sure the reduced inflow happens in an orderly way, especially in the low-skill sectors, like food processing, where business will be most affected. When Singapore decided to reduce its dependence on foreign labour, it offered grants and loans to labour-intensive businesses to smooth the process of automation or of finding local labour.
Moreover, when replacing freedom of movement we have a chance to minimise EU antagonism by crafting a “half-way house” system that acknowledges a continuing special relationship. It is widely accepted that all EU citizens should to enjoy visa-free travel for tourism or short business trips. And there is no reason to limit the number of EU students. But we could go further and offer a speedier and simplified work-permit process, a presumption in favour of accepting most high-skilled EU applicants with a job offer and perhaps give them access to the whole social state after just a two years, unlike five years for a non-EU immigrant.
That way we can keep most of the French and German bankers and other professionals, who pay in far more than they take out and do not compete with poorer Britons for jobs or social infrastructure, and gradually cut back on the eastern European building workers and cut-price IT workers from South Asia, and replace them with better trained and better paid Brits.
The Outers’ message resonated with those who feel left behind
Why do so many British voters feel resentment towards an EU that so many other British voters regard, if not with love, then as a benign embodiment of modernity?
It is all about social class, age, education and mobility. This has been Britain’s most class-based vote of recent decades, with the normal cross-class alliances dissolving into an early-21st-century “peasants’ revolt”.
According to all the pollsters, the lower down the social and educational ladder you descend the greater likelihood that someone will have voted Leave, while the best markers for Remainers is having a degree and being aged 18 to 29.
The so-called “left behind” voters — old, white, blue-collar — formed a core of Leave voters, along with a more middle-class Tory phalanx, but the anti-EU message has also resonated with a larger group of middling Britons.
This is about worldview and values as much as income. The sociologist Talcott Parsons used to distinguish between people with “achieved” and “ascribed” identities.
The former have, typically, done well at school, left home to go to university and then climbed a professional hierarchy — their sense of themselves is based on their achievements and they are thus comfortable with social and geographical mobility. The EU suits them.
The latter derive their identity much more from group and place — more than 60 per cent of British citizens still live within 20 miles of where they lived aged 14 — and are thus much more easily discombobulated by mass immigration and social change in general. The EU does not work so well for them.
They are not, in the main, angry in a brick-throwing sort of way, but feel slighted by the declining status of so much non-graduate employment and rapid demographic change that no one consulted them about.
Moreover, many are unmoored from traditional political parties and no longer feel that their mobile elites are looking out for them.
Remainers will note that this has little to do with the EU. But to lower-middle-England the bloc’s benefits usually seem to go to others — young British professionals working in Berlin or Paris, migrants from Poland or Romania who bring competition for jobs and services — while they pick up the bill and live with ever more remote decision-making.
If there is one big lesson to draw from the surprising success of the Brexit campaign it is surely that Britain’s political class has consistently underestimated the negative consequences — psychological, economic and social — of greater global (and European) interconnection on poorer people.
What may also have been missed, especially on the left, is that while many people in the top 25 per cent of the educational and economic hierarchy have become less attached to national social contracts in the past couple of generations, others have actually become more dependent on them. The national welfare state has been expanding — think tax credits and the growth of housing benefit — and although state employment has been in decline, if you live in a rundown area, you are more likely than ever to be a state employee.
Moreover, the loss of close, industrial communities over the past few decades might well have produced a stronger attachment to the imagined community of the nation and its social supports.
Disappointed liberals are right to point to a streak of irrationality among some core Leavers: when asked how much people trust official statistics, more than 75 per cent of those earning more than £3,700 a month say they do, while only 27 per cent of those earning less than £1,200 a month agree.
Liberals are right too that some Leavers are xenophobes. But most, I would contend, are more accurately described as liberal populists — wary of rapid change, mildly nationalistic and with somewhat socially conservative views — but also suspicious of authority and bloody-mindedly keen on their rights (and usually those of minorities too).
Such people deeply resent being dismissed as “Powellites”, code in Britain for racists, as two of Britain’s leading liberal commentators described the Leave campaign in the days running up to Thursday’s vote. It seems that GK Chesterton’s “people of England that have never spoken yet” have been so aroused by the condescension of the expert classes that they spoke their mind with a force that has reverberated across the entire continent of Europe.

The great British divide
 
Brexit and the election of Donald Trump — the two biggest protest votes in modern democratic history — marked not so much the arrival of the populist era in western politics as its coming of age.
Since the turn of the century, western politics has had to make room for a range of voices preoccupied with national borders and pace of change, appealing to people who feel displaced by a more open, ethnically fluid, graduate-favouring economy and society, designed by and for the new elites.
Many liberal-minded people in Britain and elsewhere have been uncomfortable about granting space to these political forces and regard hostility to the openness required by European integration and a more global economy as simply irrational, if not xenophobic.
Some of those remainers reported waking up the day after the Brexit vote feeling, at least briefly, that they were living in a foreign country. If that was, indeed, the case, they were merely experiencing, in reverse, what a majority of people apparently feel every day.
For several years now more than half of British people have agreed with this statement (and similar ones): “Britain has changed in recent times beyond recognition; it sometimes feels like a foreign country and this makes me feel uncomfortable.” Older people, the least well educated and the least affluent are most likely to concur, but there is quite widespread support from other groups too.
 
Protesters march against Brexit last year
Even allowing for the querulous spirit that opinion polls often seem to inspire, this is an astonishing thing for the majority of the population to agree to in a country as stable, peaceful, rich and successful as today’s Britain. It is a similar story in America, where 81% of Trump supporters said life was better 50 years ago. What is going on?
The old distinctions of class and economic interest have not disappeared but are increasingly overlaid by a larger and looser one — between the people who see the world from Anywhere and the people who see it from Somewhere.
Anywheres dominate our culture and society. They tend to do well at school and then usually move from home to a residential university in their late teens and on to a career in the professions that might take them to London or even abroad for a year or two.
Such people have portable, “achieved” identities, based on educational and career success, which make them generally comfortable and confident with new places and people.
Somewheres are more rooted and usually have “ascribed” identities — Scottish farmer, working-class Geordie, Cornish housewife — based on group belonging and particular places.
One core group of Somewheres has been called the “left behind” — mainly older white working-class men with little education. They have lost economically, with the decline of well-paid jobs for people without qualifications, and culturally, too, with the disappearance of a distinct working-class culture and the marginalisation of their views in the public conversation.
Somewhere ambivalence about recent social trends spreads far beyond this group, however, and is shared by many in all social classes, especially the least mobile. Despite recent increases in geographical mobility, about 60% of British people still live within 20 miles of where they lived when they were 14.
Of course, few of us belong completely to either group — we all have a mix of achieved and ascribed identities — and there is a large minority of Inbetweeners. Even the most cosmopolitan and mobile members of the Anywhere group retain some connection with their roots and even the most small-town Somewhere might go on holiday abroad.
Anywheres and Somewheres do not overlap precisely with more conventional social categories. Rather, they are looser alignments of sentiment and world-view. Both groups include a huge variety of people and social types — Somewheres range from northern working-class pensioners to home counties market town Daily Mail readers; Anywheres from polished business executives to radical academics.
The two value clusters are clearly visible in a host of opinion and belief surveys — with Anywheres making up 20-25% of the population, compared with about half for Somewheres (and the rest Inbetweeners).
My new book, The Road to Somewhere, is a plea for a less headstrong Anywhere liberalism. The Anywheres have counted for too much in the past 25 years — their sense of political entitlement startlingly revealed by their reaction to the Brexit and Trump votes — and populism, in its many shapes and sizes, has arisen as a counterbalance to their dominance throughout the developed world. It can be a destructive counterbalance, but if we are to be tough on populism we must be tough on the causes of populism too — and one of those causes has been Anywhere overreach.
The Anywhere ideology — or “progressive individualism”, as I call it — is a world-view for more or less successful individuals who also care about society. It places a high value on autonomy, mobility and novelty and a much lower value on group identity, tradition and national social contracts (faith, flag and family).
Most Anywheres are comfortable with immigration, European integration and the spread of human rights legislation, all of which tend to dilute the claims of national citizenship. They are not in the main antinational — indeed they can be quite patriotic — but they also see themselves as citizens of the world.
 
Gordon Brown makes his ‘British jobs for British workers’ speech in 2007
Work, and in fact life itself, is about individual self-realisation. Anywheres are comfortable with the achievement society; meritocracy and most forms of equality (though not necessarily economic) are second nature to them. Where the interests of Anywheres are at stake — in everything from reform of higher education to gay marriage — things happen. Where they are not, the wheels grind more slowly, if at all.
By contrast, the Somewheres are more socially conservative and communitarian by instinct. They are not on the whole highly religious, unlike their equivalents in America, and only a small number on the far-right fringes are hard authoritarians or consistent xenophobes. They are moderately nationalistic and if English quite likely to identify as such.
They feel uncomfortable about many aspects of cultural and economic change — such as mass immigration, an achievement society in which they struggle to achieve, the reduced status of non-graduate employment and more fluid gender roles.
They are also, in the main, modern people for whom women’s equality and minority rights, distrust of power, free expression, consumerism and individual choice are part of the air they breathe. They want some of the same things that Anywheres want, but they want them more slowly and in moderation. Their world-view is best described by a phrase that many would regard as a contradiction in terms: “decent populism”.
The powerlessness of British Somewheres in recent times is shown by, among other things, the miserable state of vocational education and apprenticeship provision in a graduate-dominated society; the double infrastructure failure in housing (in the southeast of England) and transport (in the north); and the policy bias against domesticity and family life.
“
The Anywhere ideology is invariably a cheerleader for restless change
Both Anywhere and Somewhere world-views are valid and legitimate, and their divergence from each other is neither new nor surprising. What has changed is the balance of power, and numbers, between them.
Until 30 or 40 years ago, the Somewhere world-view was completely dominant. It was British common sense. Then, in the space of two generations, an Anywhere common sense has risen to challenge and partly replace it.
This is thanks, above all, to two things: the legacy of baby-boomer 1960s liberalism and the expansion of higher education, which has played a key role in disseminating that legacy.
The helter-skelter expansion of higher education in the past 25 years — and the elevation of educational success to the gold standard of social esteem — has been one of the most important, and least understood, developments in British society. It has been a liberation for many, and for others a symptom of their declining status.
For Somewheres, post-industrialism has largely abolished manual labour, reduced the status of lower-income males and weakened the national social contract — neither the affluent nor employers feel the obligations towards “their” working class that they once did.
The Anywhere ideology is invariably a cheerleader for restless change. When change seems to benefit everyone — such as broad-based economic growth or improved healthcare — the conflict
between the two world-views recedes. But when change does not seem to benefit everyone — as with the arrival of a mass immigration society and a mass higher education system for almost half of school-leavers — the restrained populism of Somewheres can find a voice.
Somewheres are often said to be myopic, unable to see that accepting change brings longer-term advantage. Yet it is also the case that the people from Anywhere with more fluid identities and an educational passport to thrive are well equipped to benefit from change, while the people from Somewhere are often not, even in the long run.
Anywheres tend to see Somewhere conservatism as irrational or as a backlash against the advance of liberal social values. It can be that, but it is also to be expected that people who feel buffeted by external events with little political agency, social confidence or control over their destinies will cling all the harder to those spaces where they can exercise some control — in the familiar routines of their daily lives and beliefs.
Somewhere conservatism may have shed many of the historical trappings of mid-20th century classic working-class conservatism — the Protestant faith, jingoism, white supremacy — but the instinct to stick with the familiar and to those small zones of control and esteem means Somewheres are often hostile both to market change and to top-down state paternalism.
Most Somewheres are not bigots and xenophobes. Indeed, much of the “great liberalisation” of the past 40 years in attitudes to race, gender and sexuality has been absorbed and accepted by the majority of Somewheres. Yet compared with Anywheres, the acceptance has been more selective and tentative, and has not extended to enthusiasm for mass immigration or European integration. Somewheres are seldom anti-immigrant but are invariably anti-mass immigration. They still believe there is such a thing as society.
 
At the Treasury, former cabinet secretary Gus O’Donnell ‘argued for the most open door possible to immigration’
FRANCESCO GUIDICINI
Eric Kaufmann, a leading authority on nationalism and ethnicity, has shown that the Brexit and Trump backlashes were not only about education and mobility but also about a core values divide, relating to order and authority, that cuts across age, income, education and even political parties in western democracies.
There is a cluster of questions that pollsters ask about the importance of children being obedient, support for capital punishment and so on — known as the authoritarian-libertarian axis — and a position closer to the authoritarian end of the axis turns out to be the key predictor of whether someone voted for Brexit or not.
Strong authoritarianism is the instinct of only a small minority but the broader desire of Somewheres for a more stable, ordered world is now being heard in the parliaments and chancelleries of the developed world. And Generation Z, everyone born after 2001, seems to confirm this new tilt towards caution and conservatism.
Kaufmann emphasises the ethnic aspect of this shift: “As large-scale immigration challenges the demographic sway of white majorities, the gap between whites who embrace change and those who resist it is emerging as the key political cleavage across the West. Compared with this cultural chasm, material differences between haves and have nots . . . are much less important.”
For most of my adult life I have been firmly in the Anywhere camp, and by background and lifestyle remain so. In the mid-1990s I was the founder-editor of Prospect, the monthly current affairs magazine, that was loosely affiliated to the liberal centre-left and endorsed new Labour’s arrival in 1997.
But while editing Prospect, I also began to detach myself, intellectually, from orthodox liberalism — in particular after writing a rather speculative essay for the magazine headlined “Too Diverse?”. It raised questions about the conflict between rapidly increasing ethnic diversity and the feelings of trust and solidarity required to sustain a generous welfare state.
The essay caused an almighty row, at least on the centre-left. I was accused of “nice racism” and “liberal Powellism”. That brief notoriety triggered a lasting interest in immigration, race, multiculturalism, national identity and so on. And the more I studied these things and tried to defend my initial, rather accidental, scepticism, the more I became convinced that the left had got on the wrong side of the argument on mass immigration (too enthusiastic), and integration of minorities and national identity (too indifferent).
On matters of culture and community, the sometimes socially conservative intuitions of mainstream public opinion came to seem to me at least as rational and decent as the individualistic egalitarianism of the middle-class, university-educated left that now dominates the Labour Party.
Dogmatism and groupthink are not the preserve of poorly educated Somewheres. Indeed, progressive Anywheres tend to be more socially tolerant than Somewheres but less politically tolerant.
I am a kind of Anywhere apostate but I like to think that I can see the point of both world-views. My social networks still largely comprise Anywheres but when the conversation turns to politics I often find myself looking on as an outsider.
That does mean I sometimes hear Anywhere views in their most unvarnished form — my email inbox was full of angry contempt for the ignorant masses from left-wing professors in the days after the Brexit vote. And here are two examples of conversations I have been part of in the past few years that lend some support to Theresa May’s reprimand to the world citizens “from nowhere”.
At an Oxford college dinner six years ago I told my neighbour — Gus O’Donnell, then in his last few months as cabinet secretary, the most senior civil servant in the land — that I was writing a book about immigration. He replied: “When I was at the Treasury I argued for the most open door possible to immigration . . . I think it’s my job to maximise global welfare, not national welfare.”
I was surprised to hear this and asked the man sitting next to him, Mark Thompson — then director-general of the BBC — whether he believed global welfare should be put before national welfare, if the two should conflict. He defended O’Donnell and said he too believed global welfare was paramount.
Both men’s universalist views are perfectly legitimate and may reflect their moderately devout Catholic upbringings. They are views that are quite normal in some circles and may now encompass up to 10% of public opinion. O’Donnell, moreover, thinks that his views about immigration are, notwithstanding some short-term losers, in the interests of the average British person. But is it healthy for democracy when such powerful people hold views that are evidently at odds with the core political intuitions of the majority of the public?
 
  says the left got it wrong on national identity and mass immigration
KAREN GORDON
If these were just private views that had no bearing on the jobs both men did, it would not matter. But O’Donnell was the permanent secretary of the Treasury when important decisions were being made about immigration — not least the decision in 2004 to open the British labour market to the former communist EU states seven years before required by EU law, and seven years before any other large EU state did so. By all accounts he was a powerful advocate for openness.
In 2007 I was at a 60th birthday party for a well-known Labour MP. Many of the leading intellectual figures of the British centre-left were also there and the conversation turned to Gordon Brown’s infamous “British jobs for British workers” in a speech he had given a few days before at the Labour conference.
The people around me entered a bidding war to express their outrage at Brown’s slogan. Chris Huhne, who went on to become a Liberal Democrat cabinet minister in the coalition government, declared to general approval that it was “racism, pure and simple”.
I remember nodding along but then thinking afterwards how weird the conversation would have sounded to most other people in this country. Brown’s phrase may have been clumsy and cynical but he didn’t say British jobs for white British workers.
In most other places in the world today, and indeed probably in Britain itself until about 25 years ago, such a statement about a job preference for national citizens would have seemed so banal as to be hardly worth uttering. But in 2007 the idea of a borderless Europe and the language of universal rights had ruled it beyond the pale, at least for this elite centre-left group.
Last October a similar row blew up over a suggestion, indirectly from Amber Rudd, the home secretary, that companies should inform the Home Office of the proportion of their non-British employees when applying to sponsor a foreign worker for a work permit. The intention was to signal to employers that they might be overdependent on foreign workers and not doing enough to train British ones.
There was an indignant outcry from business and liberal Britain — in some cases absurdly citing the treatment of Jews in Nazi Germany — and the measure was quickly dropped.
A YouGov poll, however, found 59% support for the proposal and 26% against — proportions that almost map on to my estimate of the Anywhere and Somewhere populations of Britain.
“
If the Somewheres’ interests are not better accommodated into the mainstream, then further shocks like Brexit are possible
Both Gordon Brown and Amber Rudd were addressing a real issue. As part of the greater freedom and efficiency of British business since the 1980s has come a weakening of the idea of the national corporate citizen, the implicit obligation to train and employ British citizens.
As larger businesses have become more global and footloose, employers have come to expect complete freedom to import skilled workers and in some cases unskilled workers. It did not even occur to the Labour Party to complain about this.
Business self-interest and the progressive world-view — with its stress on openness, rights and equality — have both become uncoupled from commonsense notions of economic justice, still seen through a national lens.
This uncoupling illustrates how the gap between the secular liberal Anywhere world-view that dominates our political parties, governmental and social institutions and the intuitions of the ordinary citizen has become the great divide in British life.
Can British politics broker a new settlement between the Anywheres and the Somewheres? There is a lot at stake. If Somewhere interests are not better accommodated into the mainstream, then further shocks like the Brexit vote are possible.
Why I left my liberal London tribe
Why do we change our mind about things? Many historical figures have adjusted their thinking on particular issues in response to events: Charles de Gaulle changed his mind about Algeria, just as Robert Peel did about tariffs and FW de Klerk did on apartheid.
Then there are changes of mind that are more like changes of worldview. They can happen quickly or slowly. Steve Bannon, Donald Trump’s fearsome adviser, was changed and politicised by a single event: 9/11. Former friends testify that it even seemed to make him a somewhat different person.
I have changed my mind, more slowly, about modern liberalism. As a leftwing student, I was in rebellion against a bourgeois background. Later, I became the founding editor of the centre-left magazine Prospect. It was there that I first tentatively dissented from the liberal consensus on immigration and multiculturalism. In 2004 I wrote an essay about the tension between diversity and solidarity, based on what I thought was the uncontroversial assumption that people are readier to share with people with whom they have something in common. Instead I met the intolerance of the modern left for the first time. Subsequently, I’ve grown used to being accused of racism, even by my own children.
There was no single moment when I realised I had left the liberal tribe. But one recent incident crystallised matters. I was chatting to a group of friends in a bar, including a few people I didn’t know, and I said I could understand the discomfort that Nigel Farage had recently expressed about not hearing a single English-speaker on a train in London. One of those I didn’t know loudly slammed their glass down and ostentatiously walked out.
The value divides in British society that led to Brexit, and may now break up the United Kingdom, stem from the emergence in the past generation of two big value clusters: the educated, mobile people who see the world from “Anywhere” and who value autonomy and fluidity, versus the more rooted, generally less well-educated people who see the world from “Somewhere” and prioritise group attachments and security.
There are many subdivisions within both groups, of course, as well as a large “inbetweener” group. I invented the labels for a book I have just written but not the value clusters themselves, which are there for all to see in British surveys, where Anywheres account for about a quarter of the population and Somewheres for about half.
I referred to changing my mind as though it were a rational process, in which one audits one’s beliefs every few years and decides to shift ground on Israel/Palestine or the single market. But that’s not how it works. If, like most educated people, you place a high value on moral and intellectual coherence, your views tend to fit together into something like an explicable worldview. And that usually goes along with informal membership of a network of like-minded people. Without having to think very hard you know you all broadly favour and oppose the same things.
It is comforting being part of a loose extended family of belief and assumption. This helps to create protective walls around your worldview — so-called confirmation bias. In Britain this is sociologically reinforced by a mainly residential university system (unlike most colleges in the US and continental Europe), which means that regardless of starting point most graduates of Russell Group universities are likely to have few, if any, non-graduate close friends. University also confirms a kind of social status in which liberal attitudes — support for economic and cultural openness and equality of most kinds — are part of the ethos differentiating Anywhere students from the mass of Somewheres.
Upon graduation from university, too, Anywheres tend to be more mobile than Somewheres, their careers often sucking them into London for a period. Yet more than 60 per cent of British people still live within 20 miles of where we lived when aged 14.
The house cricket team at Eton in 1972.   is seated front row, far left
This matters because the very structure of our daily lives reinforces our beliefs and even interests. If, to use economic jargon, you have high human capital, you will thrive in open, competitive systems and only be held back by prejudice or protectionism. You are also likely, in the language of American sociologist Talcott Parsons, to have an “achieved” identity, meaning one based on your own educational and career success, rather than an “ascribed” identity based on gender, ethnicity, particular places. This helps you to move more confidently through the world, unlike those with more fixed identities, who can be upset by rapid change.
To take a Brexit-related example, if you are an Anywhere, EU freedom of movement is in your interests because you can take your talents elsewhere in Europe for a few years without bureaucratic hindrance and you are unlikely to face much direct competition from people moving the other way — indeed, having some French or Polish acquaintances may even make your life more interesting. Somewheres, by contrast, are far less likely to have the qualifications or aptitude to work abroad and do often face direct competition from EU citizens coming here — more than one-third of production jobs in food manufacturing (about 120,000 people) have been filled by people from eastern Europe in the past few years, up from almost nothing before 2004.
It is true there have always been affluent and educated people with more open and expansive views than those living more pinched lives. What is different now is the scale. Until recently, Anywhere liberalism was the preserve of a small percentage of the population. Now, thanks to the expansion of higher education, it may extend to 20 to 25 per cent of the population and is growing. And, over the past generation, it has dominated the political class and the national culture. Anywhere politicians who think they are governing in the national interest are, at least some of the time, governing in the Anywhere interest — in everything from the expansion of higher education to the unprecedented openness of modern societies.
Both the Anywhere and Somewhere world views are legitimate, and decent, in their different ways and in many areas of politics and economics the division is barely relevant. But on the so-called “security and identity” issues that have loomed so much larger in recent years, they have created a dismayingly large gulf in British society and an instability in our politics which has ended our membership of the EU and may now be ending the union with Scotland, too.
So how did I, as someone who by background is as Anywhere as it is possible to be — start to listen in as an outsider to my friends’ political conversations? How did I start to see the divide from the Somewhere side? What has changed me?
The conventional explanation is that I grew up, became a family man, became more rooted myself and saw more clearly that charity begins at home (even if doesn’t end there). But no one wants to be a cliché and we prefer the idea that it was the outside world that changed — as Ronald Reagan put it, “I didn’t leave the Democratic party, the Democratic party left me.”
The more flattering explanation is that I have always been restless, never felt comfortable in the tribe. After breaking with the assumptions of my own upper-class background (my late father was a Tory MP) I became an old Etonian Marxist in my late teens and early twenties. Yes, how ridiculous, especially as my disaffection was probably triggered less by empathy for the wretched of the earth than by the setback of failing to reclaim my place in the 1st XI football team after an illness and failing to get into the 1st XI cricket team at all (something I discovered later was also true of old Etonian 1930s Marxist and then member of the Attlee government, John Strachey!).
I never felt comfortable as a privileged leftist, the inauthenticity was too stark, but returning to the traditions of my upbringing was out of the question, so I became a familiar social type, the guilt-ridden left-liberal journalist.
If you went to the most famous school in the land you are often regarded as a social freak, a tourist in your own country. But, as the patron saint of the Etonian awkward squad George Orwell knew, there is something to be said for being an insider-outsider. It helped to make me aware of the strangeness of some of the instincts of my north London liberal tribe in the 1980s and 1990s: the far greater concern for suffering in distant lands than just around the corner, the blank incomprehension of religious or national feeling and the disdain for the ordinary people we were meant to champion.
As Orwell also discovered, people don’t like it when you leave the tribe, and I have certainly lost a few friends as a result. At a recent public meeting, the writer David Aaronovitch told me that because I went to Eton I wasn’t able to side with Somewhere interests. This felt like crude class stereotyping but then it occurred to me that, perhaps for the first time in my life, I am behaving as Marxist intellectuals are meant to, transcending bourgeois class interests to speak to the concerns of the masses — no longer “bread and land” but “recognition and rootedness”.
This has all provided some underpinning for my gradual break with the liberal tribe that had been my home for 25 years. But it also required intellectual guides — such as Michael Lind, Maurice Glasman, Eric Kaufmann and Jonathan Haidt — who helped me to nail down my inchoate dissatisfaction with modern liberalism. There were several lightbulb moments as I came to see past the narrative of progress that has helped to form the shallow liberalism that dominates our politics.
This narrative sees race and gender equality as a prelude to the transcending of all exclusive communities, including the nation state. But the moral equality of all human beings — the beautiful, once utopian idea that became embedded in many western constitutions in the middle of the 20th century — does not mean we have the same obligations to all human beings.
This vital caveat to universalism keeps liberalism bound to the earth, to the reality of flesh-and-blood humans with group attachments and the need to be valued and to belong. Of course modern politics — the rule of law and more recently the idea of human equality — are partly designed to tame and constrain our tribal and animal emotions. But if politics disappears too far into the individualist abstractions of law and economics it starts to see society as just a random collection of individuals.
  with former US president Bill Clinton at Hay literary festival in 2001
From this caveat can flow a more mature and emotionally intelligent liberalism that sees that there really is such a thing as society and one that functions well is based on habits of co-operation and trust and bonds of language, history and culture. Newcomers can be absorbed into such societies, and can retain some of their own traditions, but unless a critical mass of them embrace the broad common norms of the society, the idea of the nation as a group of people with significant shared interests — the idea of a people — will fracture.
Thus moderate nationalism is a positively benign force reinforcing common interests (and welfare states) against the disintegrating effects of affluence, individualism and diversity. Yet discomfort about national feeling is especially strong among English Anywheres, a legacy of English dominance. This often makes them tin-eared to other nationalisms in these islands. Ask English people at a middle-class London dinner party whether they are proud of their country and you will get bluster and embarrassment — in Edinburgh, Cardiff or Dublin you will get uncomplicated affirmation.
An emotionally mature liberalism must also accept that white majorities, not just minorities, in western societies have ethnic attachments too and an interest in a degree of demographic stability — and it is not shameful or racist for people to feel uncomfortable if their neighbourhood changes too rapidly, whether from gentrification or ethnic change.
Other things flow from the caveat, too — things that do not challenge the core beliefs of modern liberalism but temper and qualify their more dogmatic application. The belief, for example, that men and women are equal but not identical and that some sort of gender division of labour in the home and the broader society remains popular. That order and legitimate authority in families, schools and the wider society are a necessary condition of human flourishing, not a means of crushing it. That religion, loyalty and the wisdom of tradition deserve greater respect than is common among “blank sheet” liberals who tend to focus narrowly on issues of justice and harm.
As Haidt points out — contrary to the old claim that the right is the stupid party — conservatives can appreciate a wider range of political emotions than liberals: “It’s as though conservatives can hear five octaves of music, but liberals respond to just two, within which they have become particularly discerning.”
You do not have to be a conservative or a Conservative to see this and I would regard myself as a centrist, open to ideas from left and right. Indeed I am now post-liberal and proud, and feel that for the first time in my life I have had the confidence and experience to work things out for myself.
Am I trying to save liberalism or bury it? I am certainly trying to save it from the over-reach that has produced the Brexit/Trump backlash and want to convince as many as possible from my old tribe that we need a new settlement that is more generous to the intuitions of Somewheres. Come, join me, you have nothing to lose but your comfortably consensual dinner parties.
The 'British Model': Give Refugees Work - Standpoint
This book is a rare and wonderful thing: a work of politically engaged scholarship with a trenchant analysis and original solutions.
It deals with one of the most emotional subjects in contemporary politics — what to do about the world’s growing number of refugees — in a humane but hard-headed way. It thereby, although it does not admit to this, provides ample justification for what one might call the new “British model” in refugee management.
It also provides a devastating critique of Angela Merkel’s reckless welcome to Syrians in the summer of 2015, the implications of which have rippled far wider and more destructively than one might imagine.
And what gives the critique of the refugee status quo extra force is that it comes from two people with impeccable records of concern for the world’s most vulnerable; one might almost say that they write from the heart of the liberal academic establishment (though Paul Collier has a recent record of creative transgression).
Their thesis is relatively straightforward. The world currently has 32 significant “displacement” incidents all emanating from the 40 to 60 states (out of 195) that are commonly described as “fragile”. These incidents have caused 65 million people to leave their homes and 21 million to cross international borders to seek safety (only the latter are technically refugees). Some 90 per cent of the 21 million are in neighbouring, mainly poor, countries such as Iran, Ethiopia, Kenya and Pakistan. Less than 10 per cent are in the rich world.
Fewer than half of the refugees are currently in camps, which first became a feature of the refugee experience in the 1980s, with most of the rest trying to get by in the towns and cities of their host countries. The most visible minority of them try to reach rich countries — as more than a million did in 2015 — to take advantage of liberal asylum laws, flanked by hypocritically impenetrable borders that make sure it is hard to do so. So the options, as the authors put it, are: “Encampment, urban destitution, perilous journey.”
This regime is still essentially regulated by an international convention — the 1951 Geneva convention on refugees — and a UN institution, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), that date from the late 1940s and early 1950s and are no longer fit for purpose.
The 1951 convention with its famous phrase “well-founded fear of persecution on grounds of race, religion . . .” requires signator countries to accept refugees if they can prove individual persecution and, above all, not to send them back to anywhere unsafe. In its original form the convention applied only to Europe and was essentially a propaganda move in the Cold War, signalling to Soviet dissidents that if they managed to escape they would not be returned. And the UNHCR is a noble sticking plaster institution that just hands out food and shelter to dependent refugees and is chronically underfunded and too hidebound to think afresh about how to improve the camp experience.
The authors do not call for the abolition of the 1951 convention but they point out how circumstances have made it redundant. The vast majority of refugees are not threatened by individual persecution — though some still are, such as Afghan Nato interpreters or some African opposition leaders — but are rather the victims of conflict, usually civil wars. And most of the countries they languish in are not even signatories to the 1951 convention.
We, especially in the rich West, still have a moral duty to offer protection though it is not quite clear what that moral duty amounts to. It seems to be a variant of what David Miller has called “weak cosmopolitanism”, or the idea that we have a duty to the wellbeing of all other humans, but obligations to them that vary, depending on our moral or physical proximity. 
Where they break with so many of their fellow refugee experts and reporter-moralists is in not insisting that as many refugees as possible should come and live in rich Western countries. They implicitly acknowledge that there are strict limits on the numbers that welfare democracies will accept. But they go further than this and argue that while movement to a rich country might benefit individual refugees, it is not in the interests of the countries they come from.
The world does not just consist of individuals seeking to maximise their welfare but of societies too, societies that need to be rebuilt after conflict has ended. The interests of the majority left behind must be considered too. And, as the authors point out, in many circumstances the most mobile are the most affluent (those who can afford to pay the people traffickers) and the best educated — a dismaying half of all Syrian graduates are now in western Europe.
To be able to fulfill one’s global obligation without opening one’s doors to many refugees — to be able to help “from distance” — is morally convenient but it is also good sense, especially as it costs more than 100 times more to look after someone in Europe than it does in a neighbouring “haven” country.
Western countries like Britain are not let off the hook. They are still required to adequately fund the haven countries — Turkey, Jordan and Lebanon in the case of the Syria crisis — and select some of the most vulnerable from among the refugees in the camps.
So the issue becomes how to organise a fair division of labour between the haven countries that take most of the people in and the rich countries that have the obligation to cover the costs. In the recent past this fairness has been absent: the UNHCR is only about one third funded and only roughly 10 per cent of the four million Syrian refugees have received any support from the UN.
Only a minority of Syrian refugees are in camps. However, roughly half of the world’s 21 million refugees are in these dismal places and now tend to be there for an average of ten years, in part because most of the world’s conflicts are civil wars that take longer to fizzle out than international ones. And it is the authors’ ideas for improving life in the camps based on allowing people to work — both to stop them risking their lives trying to get to the West but also to prevent them wasting away — that is their main contribution.
The book, indeed, has its genesis in a trip they took together to the Za’atari camp in Jordan in 2015. Refugees in Jordan, as in most other places, are generally not allowed to work. (Uganda is a notable exception, praised by the authors, where refugees have thrived.) But the two men noticed that just up the road from the Za’atari camp there was an under-used industrial park. They subsequently came up with the Jordan Compact to get refugees working in the park, a plan backed by the Jordanian government, David Cameron and the World Bank.
The Compact, now being copied in Ethiopia too, could transform the lives of refugees around the world by giving them purpose and dignity and also making them useful to host countries. The idea is that special zones will attract Western companies whose goods then have privileged access to Western markets — buying “refugee” could soon become as common as buying fair trade for socially conscious consumers.
Britain has been closely involved with the Jordan Compact and this book might be seen as a manifesto for a new hardheaded “British model” in fulfilling our moral obligations to refugees at a distance. We have taken in few refugees in recent years (though we have selected some of the most vulnerable from camps) but have spent more than any comparable country in host countries.
Angela Merkel’s display of the “headless heart” in 2015, by contrast, gets a thorough drubbing. Not only did it hugely increase flows and boost the people-smugglers: it also tore up the EU’s Dublin rules (under which refugees must apply for asylum in the first EU country they arrive in), alienated all of eastern Europe, contributed to the Brexit vote, intensified the conflict in Syria itself, and by denuding the country of so much of its educated elite has made reconstruction harder. The road to hell . . .
The book is clearly written, though suffers from a rather didactic tone in parts. It is full of illuminating asides such as how mobile phones came to trigger the Arab Spring. I was unconvinced, however, by the theory that the number of refugees is on an upward trajectory because the world is getting more violent. Surely all forms of movement are rising because the poor world has a larger middle class, some of whom are desperate to get out and are more likely to have the means to do so. I spotted two mistakes: Poland was not a member of the EU in the 1990s; the famous “Breaking Point” poster in the Brexit referendum was a UKIP poster, not a Leave campaign poster (and was denounced by one of the leading Leavers, Michael Gove).
But this is an important book that transcends the moralism of so much refugee coverage, for example the Guardian journalist Patrick Kingsley’s book The New Odyssey, that urges us just to empathise with individuals. Betts and Collier are not short of empathy but can also look at the bigger picture. They may thereby have helped to improve millions of lives.
Opinion | In Favor of a Fuzzy Brexit (Published 2017)
 
 
LONDON — There is a sense of drift and stalemate about British politics today: A severely weakened prime minister who may soon be out of office. A public that is restless and anxious, as it becomes clear that our political leaders have failed to prepare people for the difficult decisions ahead on “Brexit.” And an influential minority still passionately opposed to the decision to leave the European Union.
After the unexpected victory for national-communitarian sentiment in the Brexit referendum in 2016, the general election in Britain last month featured an equally unexpected showing by the well-educated, liberal pro-Europeans — especially younger ones — rejecting Prime Minister Theresa May’s so-called hard Brexit of prioritizing immigration control and leaving the European Union’s single market and customs union.
But this stalemate between the country’s two dominant “values” blocs may turn out to be benign. Britons excel at constructive ambiguity, or “muddling through,” and a constructively ambiguous Brexit may be exactly what both Britain and Europe need.
One thing is clear: The British decision to opt for the nation-state and self-government rather than the supranational embrace of the European Union is not going to be reversed, however quixotic it seems to the internationally minded everywhere.
Opinion polls taken both before and after the June election suggest that around 70 percent of Britons think that it is the duty of the government to deliver Brexit. There is little regret among the 52 percent who originally backed leaving the European Union, and about half of the 48 percent who voted to remain now say that because it passed, it should go ahead.
It is possible that a sharply deteriorating economy could start to erode that large majority for Brexit, and if you dig down a bit deeper into the numbers, there is no clear majority for any variety of Brexit, except the having-your-cake-and-eating-it-too one with maximum return of control and minimum disruption. And that one is not on offer from the European Union — as the European Union’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, keeps reminding everyone.
Nevertheless, a series of nudges and winks in the last few weeks from several of the senior British political players — above all, the Brexit secretary, David Davis — suggest that the election has left its mark and that British negotiators are edging away from a hard Brexit toward a “fuzzy” one, for when serious trade talks begin in October.
This means a much longer transitional period than originally envisaged by both sides, possibly staying inside the European Union’s customs union in some modified form, and a much greater readiness on Britain’s part to compromise on continuing payments into the European Union’s budget (as well as a large onetime leaving fee) and on some continuing jurisdiction by the European Court of Justice.
Curiously, as the BBC’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg, suggested to me, the apparent stalemate election result that swept away the Conservative’s small majority in Parliament, while leaving them comfortably the largest party, may in the end have made no difference at all to the Brexit talks.
“Part of the thinking behind Theresa May’s surprise decision to call the election for early June was that it would give her a bigger majority and thus empower her to make the compromises necessary in a long and difficult negotiation in which Britain has a relatively weak hand,” said Ms. Kuenssberg. “It now looks as if the compromises will be forced upon her by weakness rather than strength.”
About three-quarters of all members of Parliament, including a majority in all the main parties, originally voted for Remain. A more pluralistic approach to Brexit, with greater input from the British Parliament, as well as from the devolved governments of Scotland and Wales, is now the order of the day.
Voting to leave was always going to be a lot easier than actually leaving, especially when the referendum result gave politicians no indication as to what kind of Brexit people wanted. But according to Bronwen Maddox, the director of the Institute for Government, a nonpartisan think tank, more progress in preparing for Brexit has been made behind the scenes at the highest levels of the civil service than is generally acknowledged.
“The problem is there are limits on how much preparation you can do,” she said. “You cannot do all the logistical work on preparing for a new kind of customs union with the European Union until you know what has been agreed.”
Britain’s reputation for good government and generally getting the big decisions right has taken a battering in recent months. But beneath the noisy political infighting, and more by accident than design, we may now be edging toward some sort of national consensus on a “fuzzy” Brexit. Moreover, a Brexit vote that was supposedly inspired by a narrowly provincial England, and that was predicted to tear Britain apart, has actually drawn it closer together, with both Scottish and Welsh nationalists losing ground in the June election.
There remains one big problem: the European Union itself. Since the high point of success in the mid-1990s almost everything it has touched has turned bad — the clearest justification for Britain’s decision to leave. There was the politically overextended euro, which worsened the post-2010 eurozone crisis; the premature enlargement to the former Communist states of Eastern Europe, including unchecked free movement of people; the failure to secure Europe’s external border, which encouraged the refugee crisis of 2015-16. Not to mention second-order messes like the mishandling of the Ukrainian crisis.
The European Union is run by Europe’s brightest and best, but many of them are driven by a post-national ideology for which there is no actual consensus. To many ordinary Europeans, the cure of European integration is worse than the disease. What is the point of pooling all that sovereignty if the resultant institutions cannot save you from global financial meltdown and cannot even regulate the new digital behemoths?
The European Union is enjoying an unusual unity in the early stages of the Brexit negotiations. But if, come March 2019, we end up with a mutually harming deal, or no deal at all, Brussels is sure to be at least as much to blame as London’s negotiators, who are now more open to compromise than seemed likely a few months ago. Maybe it is Europe’s true-believers who need to embrace the spirit of constructive ambiguity.

 It’s time to listen to mainstream Britain, and defend a mother’s right to stay at home for longer
 
During a general election, the family is repeatedly invoked by all parties. The real family gets almost no attention in the 2017 party manifestos, including the Conservative one.
Yet you do not have to be an old-school traditionalist to wonder whether many of our contemporary problems do not have at least some root in a neglect of the private realm.
Consider this list: the crisis in social care, thanks in part to the decline in family obligation; the housing crisis, exacerbated by the decline of the stable two-parent family; the over-dependence on immigration, because of the economic and cultural bias against larger families; the rise of stress and mental illness, especially among young women; the persistence of gender pay inequality, and the difficulty of recruiting people to caring jobs because they are so undervalued.
A central challenge of modern politics is how to restore dignity and prestige to the domestic realm – which means one parent, usually a mother, being able to afford to stay at home for longer – without reversing the advances in women’s equality and autonomy of the past generations.
Yet all the water is still flowing against domesticity. This is not an area of politics I had thought much about until recently – my own mother was a pre-feminist woman, but women’s equality has been part of the common sense of my liberal, professional social circles throughout my adult life.
But when I considered the drift of recent policy for my recent book about the value divides in British society, The Road to Somewhere, I was surprised to find how narrowly it reflected the priorities of the professional women who tend to put career before family.
At the higher end, policy is about equality at work and minimising the impact of motherhood on professional womens’ careers, and at the lower income and single mother end it is about providing the support to enable women to work as much as possible, so contributing to household income and Treasury coffers.
The broader ambivalence about the family reflects the decline of religious feeling and traditional female altruism, and a more individualistic way of life for both men and women. (Almost one third of current EU leaders are childless through either choice or misfortune.) It also reflects the increasing economisation of public life. Orthodox feminists and economists both regard the family as a place of little value – for the economists because it does not contribute to GDP, for the feminists because it prevents women from contributing fully in the only sphere that matters: the male-dominated public sphere.
Moreover, policy is increasingly driven by the assumption that the gender division of labour should not merely be modified but transcended altogether: men and women are not only equal, it is assumed, but have exactly the same priorities.
This view is so influential that even recent Tory governments appear to believe that to get a hearing in modern Britain you need to spend more time, energy and money on equality at work initiatives than on trying to reverse the decline of the two-parent family in lower income Britain.
Yet about 40 per cent of British children now grow up in cohabiting or single parent families. And family fragility is far greater at the lower end of the income spectrum. Half of pre-school children from the bottom 20 per cent of households do not live with both parents, compared with one in 14 of pre-school children from the top 20 per cent of households.
Affluent families often stick to conventional marriage arrangements for themselves yet do not preach what they practice. The decline of the mainstream family is seen as an unalterable part of the modern world, the result of choices that individuals make when less constrained by tradition.
And despite Theresa May’s reputation for more socially conservative instincts than her predecessor, this issue of family decline does not merit a mention in the Conservative manifesto. The manifesto does not even repeat David Cameron’s pledge to make Britain “the most family-friendly country in Europe.” It talks, instead, about parity for women in public appointments, helping men and women to share parenting more easily and another increase in childcare subsidy.
Nobody in mainstream politics wants to “return to the 1950s”. Many of the changes over the past 60 years have made Britain a far better place, and not just for women. Fewer people are locked in failed or abusive marriages, women can bring up children on their own without stigma if they have to, and the public sphere of work and public life now has much greater access to the brains of the female half of the population.
Yet there has been so much stress on greater autonomy for women, and the central importance of work outside the home, that we have lost sight of two equally important goals: how to respect the choices of many different kinds of women, and how to preserve the two-parent family in an era of greater moral freedom.
And a modern, flexible form of domesticity is popular. According to Catherine Hakim, a sociologist, British women divide into three groups: the work-centred 15 to 20 per cent who put job first, a similar proportion who always put family first and the 60 to 70 per cent in the middle who juggle both, but tend to put family first when children are young. A Netmums survey of 4,000 mothers of young children found that one third would have chosen to spend all their time looking after their children if they could afford it. And, according to the British Social Attitudes survey, nearly 70 per cent of women support the so-called ‘modified male breadwinner’ model – the man working full-time, and the woman part-time, when children are young.
So what would a real family policy look like? First, we should follow most other rich countries in recognising family responsibilities in the tax system. The old Married Man’s tax allowance (50 per cent on top of his standard tax allowance) was phased out in the 1990s and never replaced. Today, it is a matter of allowing couples raising children together (I would include long-term cohabiters) to pool their tax-free allowances. This would help to reduce the extra tax burden on single earner families with children and mitigate the so-called “couple penalty” in the benefit system.
We also need to review state childcare funding, now running at almost £8 billion a year. Currently you can only access support by handing your child to a stranger, yet most mothers would far prefer to keep care within the family. Why not a voucher system that would give women the choice of paying themselves or paying for external care? And that external care could include a child-minder or a grandparent.
The recent decision to limit various child benefits to two children should be reversed. There is some survey evidence that women would like somewhat larger families if they could afford them, and if we are to wean ourselves off large-scale immigration we should be encouraging that.
And what about more support for the extended family to help combat the social care crisis? The Government is already proposing that companies allow staff to take one year of unpaid leave for caring duties so why not go further and provide grants for people who want to convert garages or attics into granny or grandpa flats?
None of these mainly financial measures in themselves will stop the decline of the family. But they could help to reduce the often money-related arguments between couples, especially in low income households (we should also make parenting lessons and relationship counselling as normal as going to a pre-natal class).
Also, society would be sending a signal about the importance of family life. And if most women still prefer a male main breadwinner, then male problems in education and employment, especially those of low-income males, should be more central to thinking about families.
There is no need to continue fighting the last war for equality – my two daughters face no more obstacles to professional success than my two sons. In the interests of genuine pluralism, society can now support both the egalitarian-androgynous way of life – in which men and women share all tasks and responsibilities equally – and a modified version of the gender division of labour, and even the stay-at-home mother (and occasionally father).
I write as an outsider to Conservative Party debates, and may be missing something going on behind the scenes, but there is surely a big political win for any party that really does listen to mainstream Britain on this subject. Ending the bias against domesticity would be fair, popular and might even save the state money. It would be modern social conservatism with a purpose.
Middle May | The Spectator
 
Once, politicians remained in their safe spaces and elections were fought in a handful of swing seats. This time Theresa May is campaigning in Labour heartlands, pitching herself at people who have never considered voting Conservative before. Tories are targeting seats they have not held since the 1930s and social class seems almost irrelevant. Pollsters YouGov recently observed that class now tells us ‘little more about a person’s voting intention that looking at their horoscope or reading their palms’. As Tony Blair might have put it, the political kaleidoscope has been shaken and the pieces are in flux. A picture of a Britain with new fault lines is emerging.
To begin to understand what is happening, one must accept British politics is now as much about values and meaning as it is about money or class. To many liberals it feels like a step backwards, but it’s also a reaction to a world out of kilter.
Just as organised labour emerged in the mid 19th century to challenge the power of capital, so a more populist, cross-class politics has arisen now in the first part of the 21st century to challenge the destabilising dominance of the metropolitan, meritocratic elites.
Britain’s main fault line now runs between Anywheres and Somewheres. Anywheres, about a quarter of the population, are well educated and mobile, and tend to favour openness, autonomy and fluidity; they are generally comfortable with social change. Somewheres, about half the population, are usually less well educated, more rooted, value security and familiarity, and place a greater emphasis on group attachments (local, ethnic, national) than Anywheres; they are generally uncomfortable with
social change.
This sounds very binary but there is a great variety of Anywheres and Somewheres as well as a big Inbetweener group of about 25 per cent of the population. And while I have invented the labels for a new book, I have not invented the value groups themselves: they are there in the opinion and value surveys. The job of politics now is to achieve a settlement between these two groups: to create a more comfortable country for Somewheres without endorsing illiberalism or alienating the most dynamic forces in Britain. Theresa May is the first leading politician to talk in such terms. ‘If you believe you’re a citizen of the world, you’re a citizen of nowhere,’ she said in her first Tory conference speech as party leader. ‘You don’t understand what the very word “citizenship” means.’ So the Prime Minister seems willing and able to shape such a settlement: we have yet to see many specific policies but she does grasp the problem.
Why has this divide emerged so strongly now? The old socio-economic politics of left vs right has not disappeared but has ceded ground to security and identity issues, in response to the greater openness and moral uncertainty of the modern world. And a rapid growth in Anywhere numbers, driven by the expansion of higher education, has unbalanced the boat. Graduates tend to welcome globalisation; those who didn’t finish school tend to see it as a threat.
All main political parties are dominated by Anywhere progressive individualism and most of the policy agenda, too. So we have a knowledge economy with its high rewards for the highly qualified, alongside the disappearance of many Somewhere middle-status jobs. We see the rapid expansion of higher education and continuing neglect (until recently) of non-academic post-school training. We have greater openness of an economy and society symbolised by large-scale immigration and rapid ethnic change that discomforts many Somewheres. And we have a modern family policy with its bias against the private realm and suspicion of a gender division of labour that is still valued by many people.
Underlying so many of these changes is one bigger change: the elevation of educational qualifications into the gold standard of social esteem. Only a couple of generations ago, a large number of people performed skilled jobs that required little cognitive ability but required a lot of experience to do well. And those middling, often manufacturing, jobs also offered achievable incremental progression. Now the majority of jobs in Britain either require a degree or virtually no training at all.
And thanks to residential universities and the dominance of London, cognitive ability and social achievement is associated with leaving, separating oneself from one’s roots and becoming an Anywhere. Today, about three in five Brits still live within 20 miles of where they lived when aged 14 — but few of those people are Russell Group university graduates.
Social mobility is the mantra of all political parties, yet the main tool to achieve it has been expanding higher education, disproportionately benefitting the middle class and southern England.
No sensible person is against getting the best-qualified people into the right jobs, nor against bright people from whatever background travelling as far as their talents will take them. But listening to Anywhere politicians talk about social mobility (as they do a lot) it often sounds like the upwardly mobile insisting that everyone should become like them. Yet there is only so much room at Oxbridge or in the top professions and, in any case, it presents a very narrow vision of what a good and successful life entails.
Should it not be possible to lead such a life in Rotherham? Justine Greening, the secretary of state for education, seems doubtful. In a recent speech about social mobility she said this: ‘I just had a flashback to all the years I spent growing up in Rotherham where I was aiming for something better — many of the things we have been talking about; a better job, owning my own home, an interesting career, a life that I found really challenging… I knew there was something better out there.’ Now, I’m sure I would have wanted to leave Rotherham too. But the unselfconscious way in which a cabinet minister doubts whether it is possible to lead a fulfilled life in a town of more than 100,000 people reveals something topsy-turvy about our country.
There is, to be fair, already a retreat from Tony Blair’s target of sending half of school leavers to university and growing recognition that non-university paths have been neglected. But there is still an odd disjunction between the praise lavished on ‘ordinary hard-working families’ and Greening’s assumption that ‘success’ means leaving them as far behind as possible.
So this is the new ‘third way’ of our times: how to achieve an open, mobile society —and elite —while continuing to value meaningful (in other words, stable) communities? How to encourage success without casting
a shadow of failure over those who do not (or cannot) move up and out? This is Theresa May’s opportunity, embodying as she does that balance in her own life: a Remain-voting Conservative moderniser who was also a tough-minded home secretary and an unusually rooted middle-class, southern Englander.
The new settlement is not about a lurch to the right—large majorities have accepted the great liberalisation of recent decades on race, gender and sexuality—but about redistributing status as much as money.
The Brexit vote itself represents a significant rebalancing, above all in ending the freedom of movement that worked so much better for Anywhere lawyers than Somewhere food factory workers. Some rebalancing can also be achieved with a simple change of language and priorities, as we see in Mrs May putting workers’ rights and council housing on the Tory agenda.
She also has the opportunity to restore the value of national citizenship. This means putting citizens first in the queue for public goods and becoming more selective in our openness to the outside world. This can be done by returning immigration to more moderate levels, with as much of it as possible being temporary. A new department of Immigration, Integration and Citizenship could underline the importance placed on issues of borders and identity. A ‘citizenship ID card’ could reassure people about social fluidity and free riding. And the pledge to keep spending 0.7 per cent of GDP on overseas aid could be made less unpopular by using more of the money on helping refugees living here, as well as abroad.
In recent years, British employers have cut back on training and used immigration to fill skill gaps. We desperately need new institutions — something like the American community colleges — to restore the prestige of technical education. We also need equal subsidies for the three main post-school options of university, technical college and apprenticeship. Young people need to be matched with jobs that actually exist via closer cooperation between schools and local employers, and the armed forces (which themselves need a funding and morale boost). We should also adopt a more emotionally intelligent attitude to social mobility, with more stress on incremental steps.
Even infrastructure projects, such as the HS2 rail link and Heathrow expansion, seems to be aimed at making Britain work better for the Anywheres. Instead the focus could shift to the small and local—for example in vital rail and road connections in the north and Midlands, and keeping open pubs and post offices in small communities. And if London over-heating is cooled a bit by Brexit, then let it happen.
The weakening of family ties has contributed to several of today’s most pressing social problems, such as the social care crisis. Yet even Conservative politicians seem more interested in equality in the workplace than making it easier for low income families to stay together. We should allow couples with children to share their tax allowances and make it easier for parents to draw on childcare subsidies to look after their own children.
The Tory modernisers were wrong to think that the most fashionable ideas were the best prescription for the future. There is no appetite for returning to 1950s paternalism, but there is a desire to balance liberal Anywhere preferences with some real choice and greater respect for tradition. Moreover, people yearn not be judged solely on merit, but to be recognised as members of a national political community.
In her unflamboyant way, Theresa May has the chance to project an idea of the ‘modern middle’ that combines the best of the two world views. In the process she might also usher in a new Christian Democratic phase of the modern Conservative party.
3 new books exploring post-truth
 
 
When three books with “post-truth” in the title arrive at the same time, all offering to help us wade through a rising tide of b*******, you have to at least consider the possibility that something fundamental has changed. But what exactly? That the media, especially social media, is full of “fake news”? That a new breed of politician, above all Presidents Trump and Putin, lie more brazenly than their predecessors? Does this amount to an unprecedented assault on the idea of truth in the public realm, as all three books more or less confidently claim?
Many journalists and intellectuals have always seen it as their job to warn the public about what Vance Packard, in his late Fifties book about the advertising industry, called The Hidden Persuaders. And I’m glad that they do. People say a lot of crazy and mendacious things, especially where political or commercial power and strongly held beliefs are at stake, and thanks to the internet and social media they reach further than they used to.
But exaggerated claims in politics are hardly new even from mainstream figures: Winston Churchill in June 1945 predicted that nice Mr Attlee would have to resort to “Gestapo” methods. And does it really matter if youngsters in eastern Europe earn a little cash by getting millions of hits on a plausible-looking hoax story about the Pope endorsing Donald Trump?
Thankfully Evan Davis’s book, the most entertaining of the three, doesn’t even try to justify its subtitle: Why We Have Reached Peak B******* and What We Can Do About It. It is more of a Malcolm Gladwell-style social psychology/behavioural economics primer with lots of smart-sounding phrases, like “the habituation effect”, describing the extent of evasiveness, selectivity and self-deception in everyday life.
Davis points out that b******* has different styles and names at different times. Years ago people were writing books about “spin”, the managerial style of political communication that reached its zenith with New Labour. He ends with the comforting thought that “bullshit can captivate and entrance us for a time, but good sense normally prevails in the end”.
And hats off to Davis for breaking with the hallowed consensus about George Orwell’s essay Politics and the English Language — about the debasement of language — by pointing out that sometimes fudge and evasion are necessary; we would not have the Good Friday Agreement in Northern Ireland without them.
He also reveals a frightening fact about the modern world: there are seven times more psychology students than physics students at British universities.
Matthew D’Ancona’s book is altogether more strident. He is courageously on the side of rational, truth-loving liberals and against irrational, fibbing nativists. But he comes across as a writer who feels he has been elbowed out of the way by noisy plebeians with internet connections.
Although all three books exaggerate the depth of the change represented by the post-truth era, D’Ancona is right that the internet and social media (and a very unusual US President) have changed the style and tone of debate. The digital giants offer free content in return for our personal data, which most people regard as a reasonable exchange. But Facebook and others cannot continue to maintain that they are neutral technology platforms merely passing on messages, like the post office. When so many people get their information about the world from these outlets they will, eventually, have to accept the status and responsibilities of a quasi-publisher.
He also reflects usefully on the roots of post-truth in the postmodernism that has been so influential in the humanities in recent decades. Drawing on Marx and Nietzsche, French postmodernists said there was no such thing as truth and objectivity, only power and interests. Oddly, it is a Republican president who has best embodied this theory. He has also taken the Left’s identity politics and applied it to left-behind whites.
But hampered by their lack of sympathy for the trends they are describing, all three authors miss the bigger picture here. Politics in most rich democracies has become more technocratic and the political class more narrowly drawn in recent decades, while at the same time the means of political communication has been decisively opened up. The old elite filters have been bypassed and the masses, warts and all, are having their say.
At the same time, in response to the great openness of western societies, a more emotional socio-cultural politics — bound up with security and identity issues — has emerged to challenge traditional socio-economic politics with its more quantifiable focus on money.
James Ball, in the most forensic and best researched of the three books, captures this point when he quotes Clay Shirky saying “we’ve brought fact-checkers to a culture war”. But his argument that we need a BBC-style public service platform for the digital era seems to rather miss the point. Thankfully, we already have one. It’s called the BBC.
Is the Front National the acceptable face of populism? | The Spectator
 
Is the Front National the acceptable or the unacceptable face of populism? It was one of the few points of contention in an absorbing 90 minutes of discussion about the meaning of the French presidential election, expertly conducted by Andrew Neil.
The day before Wednesday’s Spectator debate I had heard the celebrated French intellectual, Bernard Henri-Levy, regretting the fraying of the 'Republican front' against the 'fascist' Front National. On Wednesday night at The Spectator event, Dominique Moisi used the same term. Fascist? Could more than a third of French voters be about to vote for a fascist party?
At least one man in the audience who, daringly, confessed to being a Front National supporter challenged this view of the party. And the argument did highlight a fascinating, and worrying, asymmetry in the way we think about changing political views: people on the left are allowed to change their minds, people on the right, especially the far right, are assumed never to really change. Anne-Elisabeth Moutet used the biological metaphor of a form of bacteria that never really changes its nature but can lie dormant for a while and then the true Front National bacillus will reveal itself again.
How many former Trotskyists sat around Tony Blair’s cabinet table? They were allowed to change their minds, come in from the extremist cold, and become moderate social democrats. To people on the far right we do not extend the same opportunity.
It is, of course, true that the Front National has grown out of some unpleasant political traditions: Catholic anti-semitism, Vichy, the Action Francaise anti-Dreyfus tradition. But why should we not believe them when they say they have changed? Marine Le Pen has broken with her father about as publicly and clearly as possible on Holocaust denial and so on. The party is now a supporter of Laicite not of the Catholic anti-Dreyfus tradition.
We don’t have to like the Front National’s policies on immigration (and particularly Muslim immigration) or economic protectionism but they are surely more accurately described as nostalgist than fascist.
The consensus of the evening followed the opinion polls in seeing a comfortable Macron victory in the second round. But after that, thought Jonathan Fenby, the deluge. With representatives of none of the mainstream parties in the second round and a President Macron who is likely to have few party allies in the national assembly the immediate future could be bumpy. Could disaffected trade unionists and disaffected protectionist FN supporters join forces to block the Macron liberal project?
What does a Macron presidency mean for us? It was an after-thought to the evening’s discussion and for once our panelists seemed to miss a trick. They all assumed that Macron’s EU enthusiasm would make him an advocate of a hard line against Britain in the coming Brexit negotiations. What no-one seemed to have noticed is that Macron’s main adviser on EU matters is Jean Pisani-Ferry, of the Bruegel think tank. He wrote an interesting paper last summer (along with the former deputy governor of the Bank of England Paul Tucker, among others) advocating a very soft Brexit and a new form of collaboration between Britain and the EU. But this is a minor reservation about an engrossing discussion on a complex and confusing subject that was, at least briefly, brought into some sort of focus with wit and style.
Does Brexit mean England can have Englishness? | The Spectator
 
Brexit is often said to be driven by English nationalism. In recent decades England has certainly become a less shy country, made aware of itself thanks to the growth of Scottish and Welsh national consciousness and the banal fact that we now talk about the English NHS, English schools, and so on, in a way that we never used to prior to devolution.
Yet on today's English national day I saw not a single flag of St George flying on the train journey from London to Cambridge and back (travelling through Essex, supposedly one of the heartlands of English nationalism). And when I opened my Sunday papers I found no reference to it at all. (Though Jeremy Corbyn did briefly grab the lead item on the BBC News with his suggestion of a national holiday on St George’s day.)
As I argue in my new book The Road to Somewhere (about the value divides that have led to Brexit) one of the unspoken fault lines in modern politics is between those, mainly conservatives and centrists, who see racism and nationalism as hostility to out-groups and those, mainly liberals and leftists, who see them as not only that but also about too strong an attachment to your own ethnic or national group.
It is, of course, possible to have too strong an attachment to your own group which is why we have the rule of law and anti-discrimination laws. But for too many people Englishness is one of those identities that is almost by definition ‘too strong’.
This is a quirk of history reinforced by England’s demographic domination of these islands. The great historic nation of England disappeared more thoroughly into Britishness than any of the Celtic countries—consider all those British Union Flags when England beat West Germany in 1966. And as Britishness has faded in recent decades and the ‘home’ nationalities have grown in strength, a mainstream Englishness has emerged only falteringly.
It was not taken up by the English political or cultural elites for whom a 19th century imperial distaste for narrow national feeling had easily mutated into a liberal 1960s anti-nationalism. Englishness that had once disguised itself in order to make its superiority more complete now disguised itself out of embarrassment and, at least until recently, the symbols and language of Englishness was left to cranks and extremists.
For while the Irish, Scots and the Welsh could quietly escape any moral responsibility for empire by claiming (most implausibly in the case of the Scots) that they had in fact been the first victims of English colonialism, that option was not there for the English. It could not easily exchange a bad-dominant nationalism for a good-egalitarian one.
Today’s Scottish nationalists often claim that their nationalism is civic and progressive, while the English variety is ethnic and nostalgic. There is some truth in this but all national identities are a mix of the civic and the ethnic and England can reasonably point out that it has actually been living multiculturalism (16 per cent of the English population are non-white minorities compared with 4.5 per cent of the Scottish) while the Scots have mainly just been talking about it, and have had a more deeply entrenched religious sectarianism too. And for all the SNP’s pieties about openness and wanting more immigrants, a higher proportion of Scots say you have to be white to be truly Scottish than the more mongrel English.
Scotland has, however, shown the plasticity of national identities. A new version of Scottishness has been conjured up by the SNP in the past few years, framed by the modern independence project. Could Brexit do the same for England? Probably not without the more active embrace of Englishness by the educated middle class and ethnic minority England, two groups that were notably unenthusiastic about Brexit.
And can a more normal, self-interested Englishness co-exist happily with the other nations of these islands? Brexit has already conjured up memories of an over-mighty and domineering England in Scotland and Ireland apparently oblivious to the interests of the smaller countries over the Good Friday Agreement and so on.
At least we start from the position that most English people, and the Tory party, which has some claim to being the English party, want to preserve the union in some form. A more public, confident but still restrained, Englishness, that sees one of its tasks as preserving this unique multinational state called Britain is surely not just a St George’s Day dream.
2017 was the year of Somewheres vs Anywheres
This has been a confusing political year. The fallout from the unexpected Brexit vote, and then an equally unexpected general election result, have underlined how the main divides in British politics are now as much cultural and generational as economic.
The political parties, rooted in socio-economic conflict, are struggling to adapt.
i's opinion newsletter: talking points from today
The new divide, as much within as between the parties, is about values. I would argue that the main divide is now between people who view themselves as being from Anywhere, the educated and mobile, and those who view themselves as being from Somewhere, the more rooted and small-c conservative.
‘Anywheres seldom know Somewheres because aged 18 they depart to university’
A dominant minority
The Anywheres only make up around a quarter, or less, of the population but their progressive individualist politics, which prioritise openness, autonomy and cognitive ability, have dominated policy for more than a generation and promoted, among other things, the two “masses”—mass immigration and mass higher education.
Brexit was the backlash of the less influential Somewheres, who make up around half of the population. These are people who value stability, familiarity and more parochial group and national attachments and have experienced the declining status of so many non-graduate jobs.
The Anywheres then reasserted themselves at the June election. Their new political heartland, the seats with a significant university and young graduate presence, played a decisive role in the outcome.
What kind of Brexit?
The fallout from the Grenfell tragedy put the establishment on the back foot. (Photo by Carl Court/Getty Images)
So, where are we now? Partly as a result of the election we seem to be edging from a Somewhere Brexit, prioritising lower immigration and full sovereignty, to a more Anywhere Brexit focusing on a good trade deal.
But there is no Corbynite lurch to the left in public opinion (indeed the Tories narrowly lead in the latest opinion polls) – though it is true that there is some austerity fatigue. Nor has there been a collapse in support for Brexit.
The establishment, such as it is, has been repeatedly on the back foot in recent months, from the fallout of the Grenfell tragedy to the sexual harassment scandals. But this is a function of the old cliche that the right won the economic argument and the left won the cultural one, especially on race and gender issues. Anything that can be presented as an example of elite indifference or abuse quickly turns into a narrative of outrage.
But we need to remember the left won the cultural argument most decisively among the Anywhere classes, who embrace social fluidity and dominate in higher education and many of our cultural and media institutions.
‘We are in a kind of stalemate’ 
Outside these institutions, the left is not always winning. Brexit after all was a cry of pain from those who felt national social contracts were threatened by free movement from the EU. Even most under-40s, especially those with young families, value stable communities and well-managed borders, think national citizens’ rights trump global ones, and want better options for non-graduate school leavers.
Both worldviews count
The key thing to realise is that both Anywhere and Somewhere worldviews, in all their variety, are decent and legitimate. It is the task of politics to find a settlement in which both groups feel that their core interests are respected. As the children’s author David Lucas has written, we need the Anywhere values of diversity and freedom, but these are centrifugal virtues that do nothing to stop the fragmentation of society. The virtues of duty, loyalty, respect for authority, and responsibility for one’s own patch, are largely left to Somewheres.
We are in a values version of the class crisis of the mid-1970s that was only resolved by the arrival of Thatcher (Photo by Keystone/Getty Images)
Finding a settlement is harder in Britain than in some other rich democracies because Somewhere and Anywhere personal networks diverge so sharply. Anywheres seldom know Somewheres because aged 18 they depart to residential universities, and those pursuing professional careers rarely return.
The mutual incomprehension this creates leaves our politics in a state of instability. We simply don’t agree on enough of the fundamentals—as the Brexit vote revealed. We are in a kind of stalemate, a values version of that between organised labour and the middle classes of the mid-1970s that was only resolved by the arrival of Margaret Thatcher.
What we need is a common project to bind together the interests of the two value groups. The policy “rebooting” possible after Brexit could perhaps provide that with a new emphasis on basic education and technical skills for the people and areas left behind by our London-oriented economy. In the meantime expect more political surprises until we find a new settlement to narrow our great divide.
No, there isn’t a surge in hate crime. It’s confusion that’s running riot
 
Anyone who keeps half an eye on the news will have read troubling accounts in recent weeks of a big surge in post-referendum hate crime. In Britain hate crime is an unpleasant daily reality that the government should, and does, take very seriously: every incident is a small blow against a civilised society. And reports of a rising trend help to damage Britain’s reputation abroad and stoke fear and division at home.
But what if this upward trend is based on a partial reading of facts? To address this social scar we must first understand it and that requires reliable data. Yet one of the barriers to dealing with hate crime, and even to talking about it sensibly, is the conflicting evidence produced by different parts of the state.
You will, for example, probably be surprised to learn that court convictions for hate crimes last year were actually below the number in 2010.
That still means more than 12,000 successful convictions for hate crime — crime motivated by hostility on the grounds of race, religion, sexual orientation, disability or transgender identity — or an average of 35 serious incidents a day with sufficient evidence to convict.
Yet convictions have remained broadly flat at a time when the authorities have been devoting more time and effort to the issue and the number of potential victims has been increasing. So where is the surge?
It is in the hate crime reported to the police in England and Wales. Between 2012-13 and 2016-17 there was a dramatic 90% increase in reports of hate crime, rising to about 80,000 cases last year.
And it is on this increase, along with the spike in incidents after the Brexit referendum and recent jihadist attacks, that a powerful and influential narrative has been established describing an intolerant, xenophobic Brexit Britain.
If true, this is shameful. But what the activists, newspaper headlines and even some police officers ignore is conflicting evidence, not only from the courts but also from the Crime Survey for England and Wales, which asks people whether they have been victims of a hate crime.
The most recent data shows that between 2012-13 and 2014-15 there were an estimated 222,000 hate crimes. That is down from 266,000 between 2009-10 and 2011-12 and down further from 307,000 between 2007-08 and 2008-09.
This sharply declining trend is mirrored in British Social Attitudes surveys, which find that only 1% of the population admit to being very prejudiced (down from 5% in 1985). Anti-discrimination taboos are stronger today than in the recent past and people old enough to remember the more routine violence of the 1960s and 1970s, especially towards gay people and ethnic minorities, will be sceptical of claims about an “unprecedented” rise in harassment.
Why, then, is there such a gulf between the upward trend in reported hate crime and the downward trend in the crime survey? One reason that hate crime reporting has been rising is that it is now both much simpler (easy to do online) and, usually, positively encouraged compared with 20 years ago. Encouragement comes from minority non-governmental organisations and the state itself in the shape of the True Vision website and at least a couple of thousand police officers with some hate crime role. The Metropolitan police alone have 900 staff dedicated, at least in part, to hate crime.
But there are other reasons, too, that are to do with the very low evidential bar for reporting and the subjectivism that has characterised thinking about racial and other prejudices since the Macpherson report of 1999. Any act that someone, or a witness, perceives as motivated by racial or other prejudice is now regarded as a hate crime.
For example, the Evening Standard ran a story on June 26 under the headline: “Muslim woman afraid to leave home after car is torched in hate crime attack.” It was reported that the police treated the attack as a hate crime after the victim told them she was the only Muslim living in the street, without knowing if this was relevant to the motivation of the attacker (who remains at large).
No evidence or witnesses are required to register a complaint and incidents can even be registered anonymously. Most incidents are reported directly to the police but accredited organisations such as Tell MAMA (for Muslims) and Galop (for lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender people) can also register.
It is also easy to imagine 80,000-plus reported incidents committed by 80,000 separate people but anecdotal evidence from police officers suggests most are committed by a hard core of 10,000-15,000 people (most are young white males but a disproportionate number are from ethnic minorities). Again, we need to know more.
It is not acceptable that 14% of people from an ethnic minority background living in mainly white areas say they have experienced harassment. But is hate crime overall rising or falling? Is higher reporting a positive sign of greater sensitivity to even minor acts of harassment? Are we more or less tolerant than 20 years ago?
These are hard things to measure exactly but we need a more considered expert consensus rather than the politicisation of hate crime we have seen in some quarters since the Brexit vote.
One thing we do know is that most reported hate crime is non-violent, usually verbal abuse. About 8% of race and 5% of religious hate crimes are violent resulting in injury, and another 23% and 26% are violent without injury, meaning a push or shove. Experiencing online or shouted abuse can be traumatic, but common sense, and much of the academic evidence, suggests that violent hate crime has a more negative impact on victims.
Yet some are now lobbying to remove the distinction between violent and non-violent hate crime. And the Crown Prosecution Service recently declared that online hate crime — still only 2% of reported incidents but likely to grow — was to be treated as seriously as face-to-face incidents. In a world of constrained resources, is this sensible?
Why does all this matter? One reason is that the claim of a hate crime surge may be needlessly harming the country’s standing. The government boasts that we are globally admired for our hate crime strategy. But newspapers in eastern Europe and elsewhere have been full of reports of xenophobic Britain, failing to distinguish between the upward trend of reported hate crime and what seems to be the downward historical trend of actual hate crime.
More importantly, what of the message to minority Britons? If it turns out that hate crime is falling but people believe the reverse, it may exacerbate the already large gap between the anxiety many people feel and the actual risk of attack or harassment.
It will also feed a disempowering story that says: “Why bother to apply for that promotion or work for that exam when a growing number of your fellow citizens are out to get you?” The national offensive against hate crime is welcome; the confusion about what is actually happening on our streets is not.
Crisis, what crisis? Here’s why the UK’s sensible centre will prevail
Sober people, by no means sympathetic to the left, are now predicting a Jeremy Corbyn government in months. You must forgive them. Many of them live inside the Westminster hall of mirrors where agitated overinterpretation is a way of life.
This government, like all governments, is full of flawed people, as the harassment scandal engulfing all parties at Westminster illustrates. It has also made strategic mistakes, including a premature triggering of Article 50 of the EU treaty.
But beyond the lurid tales of resignations and sexual misdemeanours, there is a good reason why things now look such a mess — the government is, in semi-public, trying to come to both a party and a national consensus over what kind of Brexit we both want and might be able to achieve, while simultaneously negotiating it.
This is a tricky balancing act but there are signs we are edging towards a provisional deal on the leaving fee and terms for the 3m-plus EU citizens living in the UK (and almost 1m Brits in other EU countries) — enough at least to allow the talks to move on to trade and other matters. And there are equally good reasons for thinking things will start to look up in the medium term, at least for the government. We either crash out without a full deal thanks to EU intransigence (or something easily portrayed as such), in which case most of the country is likely to rally round the flag. Or the outline of a semi-reasonable deal is achieved by March 2019. Both scenarios strengthen the government.
The basic health of the political system is not in doubt. Consider how the flexibility of the UK’s system of qualified parliamentary sovereignty allowed it to absorb and deflect the independence surge in Scotland, and compare that with the conflict in Catalonia.
It is true that the political parties do not reflect the new cultural divides in Britain — above all the gap between the educated, mobile and often liberally minded “Anywheres” (about 25 per cent of the population) and the more rooted, socially conservative “Somewheres” (about half the population).
But our parties have always been overlapping coalitions, and two big groups that until recently appeared to have opted out of political life, the working class in former industrial areas and young people, have opted back in.
Research by Matthew Goodwin and Oliver Heath has shown that the EU referendum turnout was strongest in working-class areas where many people had not voted in recent elections. And younger people returned to the polling booths in the June general election, helping to give Labour a far better result than expected.
But there is no lurch to the left (or right) in public opinion, though it is true that there is some austerity fatigue. (Hostility to the privatised utilities is the flip side of the hostility to the old nationalised industries and is not an endorsement of “ Corbynomics”.) Nor has there been a collapse in support for Brexit, although the country remains split down the middle on it.
The establishment, such as it is, has been repeatedly on the back foot in recent months, from the Grenfell tragedy to the current harassment scandal. But this is a function of the old cliché that the right won the economic argument and the left won the cultural one, especially on race and gender issues. Anything that can be presented as an example of elite power abuse quickly turns into an escalating cycle of outrage.
But the left won the cultural argument most decisively among liberal graduates who embrace social fluidity and dominate many of our educational, cultural and media institutions. Their thinking is driven by a spirit of righteousness, with activists often unable to accept moral complexity or admit the extent of social progress.
Outside these institutions, the left is not winning so clearly. Brexit after all was a rejection of mass immigration and a cry of pain from those who felt national social contracts were being eroded in jobs and welfare thanks to free movement. And many people in suburban Britain, even younger ones, value well-managed borders and stable communities, think national rights trump universal ones and want better options for non-graduate school leavers.
As for the Tory party, it may be in a fractious state, but governments often go through turbulent periods exacerbated by a disaster-hunting media. And look around Europe, where many other governments are in a permanent state of low-level crisis.
My advice would be to focus all energy that is not expended on Brexit on just a few key areas, bearing in mind that the Tory party is now a more overt working-class/middle-class alliance. The obvious policy areas include: reform of the housing market, with an accent on getting young people on to the property ladder or into social housing; sorting out social care with a fair funding system for the middle aged and their elderly parents; and investing more money in universal credit.
The government should also promote someone intellectually nimble and young to make its case across the media. Whoever it is should raise spirits by focusing on the Brexit dividends: what kind of policies we want, now that we are free to shape them independently, on immigration, farming, tax, innovation, industrial and regional policy and so on.
Of course there is a cost to leaving the EU (I voted to Remain), but we also now have an opportunity to reboot our democracy so that it better serves the interests of those neglected by mainstream politics who demanded to be heard in that fateful referendum vote.
Only connect - Standpoint
This is an immensely stimulating historical tour d’horizon tangled up in an arresting, but only half-convincing, big theory of history. The big theory wants us to look at the past through the prism of the human network and see how different kinds of network have had very different effects.
Ferguson challenges the conventional idea that networks are second-order things, the channels through which other forces flow. But does the network really have the same sort of explanatory power that, say, economics or demography or social class have in understanding long-term historical change?
Ferguson points out that the two late-18th-century revolutions, the American and French, were inspired by similar ideas transmitted through similar clubs and correspondence societies. But, he argues, it was the different network structures of America and France that led to the dramatically different outcomes of the two revolutions. Really? Surely the different sociological starting points were far more important: America, as the author himself says, had no equivalent of France’s large, illiterate peasantry.
Is network not just another word for group, albeit (usually) a chosen rather than given one? Ferguson never really defines the term and applies it without distinction to what might normally be called clubs or cabals — the Illuminati, the Bilderberg Group, the Mafia, the Bolshevik Party, the 19th-century Houses of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha and Rothschild — as well as the much larger, looser associations such as 16th-century Protestants or the British inventors and businessmen who created the industrial revolution.
Why were the latter’s industrial networks strong enough to give birth to modern manufacturing but not strong enough to overthrow Britain’s “monarchical, aristocratic and ecclesiastical hierarchies?” It is one of the perennial questions of modern British history and it is not clear how the language of networks and hierarchies helps get us closer to an answer.
Contrary to the book’s own ambiguous publicity framing, this is not a new version of history from below — it is not networks versus hierarchies (popes, presidents and prime ministers). A hierarchy, it turns out, is just a special kind of network. The proper distinction is between hierarchical networks (think the regimes of Stalin, Hitler and Mao) and distributed ones (think the Enlightenment circles of Paris or Edinburgh or their ideological opposites in today’s violent jihadist networks).
Whatever my reservations about the big network theory, it does provide an opportunity for one of the best popular historians of our time to rummage around in the past and provide us with a stream of fascinating mini-essays on a dizzying variety of subjects such as the central role of freemasons in the American War of Independence, the KGB infiltration of the Cambridge Apostles and Henry Kissinger’s role in preventing a third world war.
One thread running through the book is a creative comparison between the printing revolution of the 16th century that made the Reformation possible and today’s internet revolution. Ferguson points out that the fall in the price of personal computers between 1977 and 2004 looks remarkably similar to the fall in the price of books between 1490 and 1630.
Here he is on the printing revolution: “For most of history, hierarchical networks dominated distributed networks. In relatively small communities with frequent conflicts, centralised leadership enjoyed a big advantage, because warfare is generally easier with centralised command and control. Moreover in most agricultural societies, literacy was the prerogative of a small elite, so that only a few nodes [a concept drawn from network theory] were connected by the written word. But then, more than 500 years ago, came the printing press. It empowered Martin Luther’s heresy and gave birth to a new network.”
The internet-connected computer and smart phone have empowered the individual even more than the pamphlet and the book did in Luther’s time and much more swiftly. Two in five of the world’s population are online, up from just 2 per cent in 1998. Facebook, invented at Harvard just over a decade ago, now has two billion users (people who log on at least once a month). And among the poorest households in the world seven in 10 have mobile phones. “Never before,” writes Ferguson, “have so many people been connected together in an instantly responsive network through which memes can spread faster than natural viruses.”
The printing press began by disrupting religious life whereas the internet began by disrupting commerce. But both have reshaped the public sphere more generally in ways that, in relation to the internet, we still barely comprehend. Social media seemed to empower the outsiders in the Brexit and Trump votes despite Silicon Valley’s zealous support for the progressive individualist belief system of the cognitive elites: for openness, autonomy and mobility.
Towards the end of the book Ferguson pours a bucket of cold water over the self-serving digital liberation ideology of Mark Zuckerberg and co. “The notion that taking the whole world online would create a utopia of netizens, all equal in cyberspace, was always a fantasy — as much a delusion as Luther’s vision of a ‘priesthood of all believers’.”
In fact his account of the rise of the digital oligopolies lurches into a surprisingly pessimistic account of a world laid low by cyber crime and cyber anarchy of various kinds and speculation about whether order can somehow be restored. “Whether or not the five great powers can make common cause again [against internet anarchy], as their predecessors did in the 20th century, is the great geopolitical question of our time.”
This is a book that does not quite deliver on its central thesis but sends ideas blazing all over the place in a manner perhaps designed for the short attention spans of the digital age. And like all good non-fiction books it is stuffed full of useful factoids and observations.
Here are a few: despite mounting concern about nationalism the percentage of new cross-border Facebook friends within Europe has risen from below 2 per cent in 2009 to over 4 per cent in 2016; most rich countries may have become more unequal in recent decades but at least they are more meritocratic at the very top — the number of people who got onto the Forbes 400 list by dint of inherited wealth has declined from 159 in 1985 to just 18 in 2009; fewer people were killed in the October Revolution than in the shooting of Sergei Eisenstein’s tenth-anniversary film about it; pinpointing the counter-cultural roots of Silicon Valley, its hostile response to the first US government attempt to regulate it in 1996 came from the Grateful Dead lyricist John Perry Barlow.
He also throws up several “what ifs”, including the possibility that if US nativist populism had not in 1882 blocked the large inflows of Chinese people escaping the chaos of the Taiping rebellion, America would have entered the 20th century with two large non-white, non-European minorities, not just African Americans.
In a book that covers large tracts of history with sweeping confidence it is a quibble to complain about an absence but I wanted Ferguson’s view of what difference, if any, it might make to the current North Korea crisis that more than three million North Koreans own smart phones.
Ferguson’s network theory of history will not become the new Marxism but it has provided the excuse for an absorbing Cook’s tour of the past combined with an illuminating polemic about the current digital revolution.
 and Richard Norrie: Indiscriminate on discrimation. Two recent reports that must not lead Ministers astray.
 
Last week saw the publication of two Government-commissioned reviews, both related to the life chances of minorities. The Lammy Review, published on Friday and led by David Lammy, investigated the treatment of and outcomes for ethnic minorities in the criminal justice system (CJS). The second, published by the Social Mobility Commission (SMC), looked at the economic chances of young Muslims.
What unites both reports is the assumption that any departure from proportional minority representation – either for bad (numbers in prison) or for good (numbers in top jobs) – must be overwhelmingly the result of discrimination by the majority society. But the evidence for this is weak, which creates a double negative effect: it means the recommendations risk being ineffective, even counterproductive, while the narrative and media coverage of the reports will reinforce the very minority disaffection that they are seeking to allay. It is to be hoped that the Government’s race disparity unit, due to be launched next month, does not reinforce this tendency.
Lammy is not looking at differences in levels of recorded crime, but rather at what happens after people are arrested in terms of convictions, sentencing levels and custodial sentences. And there are certain headline figures that do suggest a problem: the non-white minority population is 14 per cent, but makes up 25 per cent of the prison population, and the black population of three per cent makes up 12 per cent of the prison population.
There is certainly a perception among many black British people that the system is rigged against them. Lammy seems to agree with them. He concludes that “BAME individuals still face bias, including overt discrimination, in parts of the justice system.”
However, Lammy does little to prove the existence of bias, particularly in the court system. Instead, statistics are presented that demonstrate that some non-white ethnic minority groups are over-represented, and some under-represented, relative to whites throughout the system.
This is a report about data. Of the 35 recommendations made, 14 are to do with data in some form. They either demand better collection, greater openness, or more appropriate analysis and appraisal. The idea is that with better data, one can see where the discrepancies lie more clearly and then adjust them. The Lammy Review calls for an “explain or reform approach”.
This is an attractive sounding phrase for the combatting of discrimination in general. The problem, though, is that we already have plenty of data on the criminal justice system but they just point to distributions—patterns of association between ethnic groups and outcomes. They are not evidence of causality, in this case discrimination.
The most striking finding in Lammy’s review was surprisingly underplayed. On page 33 of the report it is claimed:
“Under similar criminal circumstances the odds of imprisonment for offenders from self-reported Black, Asian, and Chinese or other backgrounds were higher than for offenders from self-reported White backgrounds.”
It was found that the odds for black offenders, across all offence types, were 53 per cent higher than for whites. For Asians they were 55 per cent and for the Chinese/other group 81 per cent. No differences were found for the Mixed group.
The analysis controlled for among other things: type of plea, age, offence type, and previous criminal record. This should, indeed, give us cause for concern.
Yet just because some things have been controlled for does not mean everything has. In sentencing, judges must take into account such things as harm and culpability with greater levels of either meaning a greater likelihood of a custodial sentence. Other factors such as remorse, steps to make amends, or level of dangerousness will also be at play. These in all likelihood will vary by ethnic group, yet the analysis does not control for them.
The problem with criminal justice statistics is that the more one digs, the more discrepancies you are likely to find. The mind boggles in imagining the kinds of reforms that could be introduced, all on the basis of patterns of association that have been assumed to be patterns of causation.
The Problem of Crime Statistics: Drug Offences
Take drug offences. The odds of receiving a prison sentence at Crown Courts were 240 per cent higher for non-white offenders. The point is conceded that this could be down to ethnic minorities being involved in more serious drug-related cases. Nevertheless, it is implied that this is evidence of bias.
Analysis of drug offences data from 2014 reveals that the most serious drug offences do indeed tend to have a greater share of non-white offenders. Of those charged with production, supply, intent to supply (Class A), 38 per cent were non-white compared to 21 per cent of those charged with production, supply, intent to supply (Class B), as well as 25 per cent of Possession (Class A) and 31 per cent of Possession (Class B) offences. The most serious offence of production, supply, intent to supply (Class A), carries a custodial sentence in 75 per cent of cases compared to 22 per cent for the Class B equivalent. Possession offences seldom result in a prison sentence.
Problem solved? Not entirely—non-white ethnic minorities are eight percentage points more likely to receive a custodial sentence for dealing or producing Class A drugs and 16 percentage points more likely to get one for dealing Class B. Yet there are no differences in terms of possession of either Class A or Class B drugs. Indeed, whites get higher sentences for dealing Class B drugs, as seen in the Figure below. Note how the Class B drugs pattern differs from the overall pattern of custodial sentencing.
 
More generally, no differences were found in Lammy’s analysis between white and non-white offenders in the likelihood of receiving a prison sentence in cases of acquisitive violence or sexual offences. Is it likely that the same courts, and court officials, will discriminate in some but not all offences?
Also, white people have the highest conviction rate for all indictable offences at 82 per cent (compared to 77 per cent for black people and 74 per cent for Asians) and are also nine percentage points less likely to be acquitted at Crown Court than non-whites (which may, of course, reflect an earlier bias against non-whites on the part of the police or CPS).
And for many routine crimes the sentence differences by ethnicity are negligible. In 2014 the average sentence length for Grievous Bodily Harm was: White 21.1 months, Black 21.2 months, Asian 20.8 months, Mixed 23.9 months. Chinese/other 21.2 months.
The fact that Lammy has not proved his case does not mean there is no case to prove. At the very least, there is a perception problem that may be contributing to the problem. One of the reasons for higher imprisonment of non-white people is because 40 per cent of non-white defendants plead not guilty compared with just 31 per cent of white defendants. And that is probably connected to lower levels of trust in courts and court officials among non-whites.
Yet juries themselves seem to have a pretty good record of colour blindness and the CJS has made considerable strides in recent years to increase representation of non-whites among magistrates and judges. (Indeed, the Lammy report is littered with references to an encouraging number of projects and initiatives aimed at dealing with the ethnic minority presence in the CJS.)
About 11 per cent of 16,000 magistrates are non-white and seven per cent of 3,000 court judges (rising to 10 per cent for those under 40). Lammy wants more to be done and a target of complete ethnic representativeness by 2025. This is not a sensible target. About half of all ethnic minority Britons are first generation immigrants, many of whom will be poorly educated and unable to speak English well or be fully integrated into British cultural norms. A better target would focus on British-born minorities or, for elite positions, it would be more appropriate still to take as a bench-mark the proportion of non-whites leaving Russell Group universities 25 years ago—about 9 per cent. Using that benchmark, non-white magistrates are over-represented and judges are coming along well.
This is surely a cause for celebration, as is the decline in youth reoffending. Lammy complains that the decline has been slower for non-whites, which means that their proportion has risen to 18 per cent, but he seems to forget that the under-18 proportion of the population is now 20 per cent non-white.
This raises a broader question of just how big some of the CJS discrepancies are when you account for not only age but also income, education and area of residence (inner city versus rural). Poorer young people from broken homes in inner city areas have always attracted disproportionate attention from the CJS, and while they used to be almost entirely white, now a lot of them are non-white.
There is unfairness in British life and that there is also opportunity. This we have shown in our report Bittersweet Success?, which shows both a growing minority middle class (in line with its overall share of the population) and some ethnic minority groups vastly outperforming the ethnic majority in both education and access to the higher professional middle class.
One of the startling points made by Lammy’s review is both the large share of Muslims in prison and its remarkable growth rate. 15 per cent of prisoners are Muslim whereas they constitute just five per cent of the total population. Growth over the last decade stands at 48 per cent. While the population share is alarming, the growth rate is not since it is less than the growth rate of the Muslim population as a whole: between the last two census years that grew by 72 per cent.
Nevertheless, Lammy is right to call for data collection on religion across all strands of the CJS, since it is impossible to tell if the high share of Muslims within prison is do with conversions or not.
It is important to understand who the Muslims are in the CJS, what happens to them, and why they are there. This is both from an integration perspective as well as out of a concern for extremism. Such young people are vulnerable to radicalisation. However, the Social Mobility Commission has nothing to say about this in its latest report, titled The Social Mobility Challenges Faced by Young Muslims. Instead the focus is overwhelmingly on barriers faced at school, university and work, especially for young women.
The SMC notes that Muslim women often express conservative attitudes about gender roles. However, its analysis is based on the assumption that such attitudes are things that happen to women. Women actually want to work but negative “cultural” attitudes get in the way. It is never understood that many of these women may actually be living in accordance with what they themselves value.
Evidence for Muslim discrimination
Like the Lammy Review, the focus is firmly on discrimination – yet the evidence is even weaker. For Lammy’s review, the evidential problems stem from the intrinsic weaknesses of quantitative methodology—correlation is not causation and data are patchy. For the SMC, the problems are qualitative. The researchers, led by Professor Jacqueline Stevenson, employed a qualitative research design involving focus groups conducted across the country. Sample sizes are likely to be too small to draw reliable inference and will suffer from selection bias. Inferences and policy proposals are made on the basis of just 58 Muslims (40 of whom were female). The report does admit some of these problems and yet clearly believes that its generalisations and recommendations are soundly based.
The SMC report aims to explain why Muslims (and young Muslims in particular) perform less well in their social and economic life chances than many non-Muslims. The SMC chairman, Alan Milburn speaks of a “broken social mobility promise” while Professor Jacqueline Stevenson claims:
“Muslims are excluded, discriminated against, or failed, at all stages of their transition from education to employment. Taken together, these contributory factors have profound implications for social mobility.”
In addition to their exclusion by education and employers, young Muslims suffer because they are coming from lower social income backgrounds defined by poverty and disadvantage, it is claimed. However, the story told is unduly negative and one-sided. Nowhere is it mentioned that predominantly Muslim Bangladeshis actually enjoy the same chances of getting to a Russell Group university as the white British. Nor is it pointed out that while there is economic underperformance for Pakistanis and Bangladeshis as a whole, British-born Pakistanis and Bangladeshis have the same shares in the higher managerial and professional class as British-born whites (10.2 per cent, 10.6 per cent and 10.7 per cent respectively).
The evidence for Islamophobia provided here is flimsy. It is simply claimed that “[f]or the participants in this research, Islamophobia, discrimination and/or racism is ever present and pervasive, and experienced in both direct and indirect forms.”
But when actually called to illustrate such behaviour, the examples given are subjective and tend to be rather mild:
“I interview people and I’ve been in a very white environment, people make comments – “he looked very Muslim”, “she’s, ooh look at her, she’s got a scarf on”, “she looks very Muslim”, ooh, like slight concern.”
The quotations presented in the section on Islamophobia speak more of Muslim anxiety about discrimination than concrete evidence of it.
There is discrimination against Muslims, but how much and how intense we do not know and this report does little to enlighten us. We know there are hate crimes targeted against Muslims, while surveys demonstrate greater suspicion of them than other minorities (the British Social Attitudes Survey of 2013 found that 44 per cent of adults would object to a relative marrying a Muslim, 23.4 per cent a lot, 21 per cent a little). But qualitative interviews are not the way to provide evidence of this. If you ask people why they do badly, they are likely to want to put themselves in a good light and seek to blame others or “society/racism”.
However, when you ask Muslims, through proper survey methods how much discrimination there is, their perception is that it is far from pervasive.
Polling of Muslims conducted by ICM for Policy Exchange found that just six per cent considered religious harassment to be a big problem with 14 per cent considering it a slight problem. Also, data from the Citizenship Survey 2010/11 show that 13.2 per cent of Muslims who had applied for a job in the last five years considered themselves to have been discriminated against.
The SMC report makes various recommendations. It calls for the Department for Education to “put in place a careers strategy that promotes informed and inclusive choices by pupils. Free from stereotypical assumptions” to be piloted in Muslim communities where there is high unemployment. Furthermore, the report calls for mentoring and support for Muslim children at school as well as guidance for parents on career choices, as well as diversity training for teachers, and further diversity training and unconscious bias training for employers.
Of course, much of this will be in place already, and there is evidence that mandatory diversity training may actually have negative effects. Also, the report seems to have given no thought to the reaction of non-Muslim children who will be living close by (although not necessarily attending the same schools) – some of whom, including white working-class kids, will be doing even less well in school. (Lammy, to be fair, does seem aware of this issue.)
The SMC report, like Lammy, acknowledges there might be “cultural” differences at play, particularly with regard to women and work. Only about one third of adult Muslim women work, one reason for the low household income of most Muslim groups.
However, it does not ask the question: does religion matter? Of course it does. Islam as it is practised in Britain is the least relegated to the private sphere of all the major religions.
Survey data from Understanding Society make the point: 22 per cent of Muslims said that their religion affected the job decisions they made. Thirty-two per cent said religion affected the savings and investments they made. None of the other the major religious groups surveyed come close on these measures.
The point is clear: with greater religious prescription will come greater opportunity costs. The same survey found that Muslims were also much more likely to say that their religion impacts on what they eat, drink, wear, and who they socialise or partner with. The more religious social restrictions there are, the more cut-off Muslims are likely to be from career and other networks and therefore the less likely they are to enjoy economic opportunities.
 
Other studies have also pointed to the segregationist tendencies found within the British Muslim population. For instance, our polling found that while 53 per cent of Muslims would like to fully integrate with non-Muslims in all aspects of life, 37 per cent would like some degree of separation on things like schooling and law, while six per cent would like minimal integration.
While the hard segregationist Muslims are rare, it is reasonable to assume that even more moderate conservatives will be cutting themselves off from opportunity to some extent.
We have to recognise that there is a trade-off between religious conservatism and thriving in a secular society. And some Muslims choose not to succeed on the terms of Britain’s liberal, secular society. Differences can be accommodated to some extent by non-Muslims, but even in the relatively open society that is modern Britain there will be some economic penalty to pay.
Lammy’s report is a more serious piece of work than the SMC’s, and he makes some reasonable suggestions, including ideas about changing the regime on non-disclosure of criminal records. Indeed, there is a decent report struggling to emerge from beneath the tendentious rhetoric and selective statistics.
Between the lines he is forced to admit that the CJS is not doing a bad job on race and his conclusion and recommendations are correspondingly mild: essentially, please try a bit harder and publish some more data.
Lammy accepts that most of the causes of discrepancy in offending itself lie outside the system, especially for the big outliers – young black Britons. He mentions poverty and the high incidence of families without fathers, which is clearly one of the key factors behind high rates of black offending compared with, say, young Sikhs and Hindus. But he never talks about the culture of disaffection so prevalent in popular culture, and encouraged by some parts of liberal Britain, that so often assumes that black kids don’t have a chance so might as well live outside the system.
Moreover, the biased way in which he has written about his own report— generating a Guardian article headlined “The racial bias in our justice system is creating a social time bomb”—is contributing to the very disaffection that he claims to be combatting.
Brexit Must Bring A Clear End To Free Movement - But Britain Will Remain A Welcoming Society To EU Citizens
Freedom of movement from the EU was one of the biggest factors behind the Brexit vote. A Brexit without a clear end to free movement in its current form is neither possible nor desirable.
But contrary to the scaremongering voiced by Vince Cable and others, ending free movement will not turn Britain into a kind of European North Korea with our young people all sitting miserably at home while the rest of Europe goes to the dance.
In fact, I predict that not very much will change in the general movement of people to and from Europe, the one caveat being that if people from the EU want to work in the UK (and vice versa) they will need a work permit.
As there are about 35million arrivals each year to the UK from EU countries, both the immigration authorities and the tourism industry have a strong interest in retaining visa-free travel for tourism and short visits (and the same is true in the rest of Europe). So don’t throw away the back-pack and railcard.
And in a report published today for the think tank Policy Exchange I further propose that we should offer continuity in arrangements for EU students in terms of fees and access to the government loan system (in the expectation that European colleges will do the same).
The number of undergraduates from the EU is not large, about 25,000 a year, and it would send a helpful signal about the UK wanting to remain the leading European centre for higher education, innovation and research (nearly half of EU students are postgraduates).
I also propose that we should extend the current Youth Mobility Visa that offers two year access to the UK for 18-30 year olds from places like Australia and Taiwan to all EU states, something that should allay the fears of the hospitality sector.
So, a balanced outcome is posseible which allows for gradual reductions in inflows, especially of low skill EU workers, while retaining a high degree of continuity in other areas. We can respond to the legitimate anxiety about over-rapid change and labour market competition while remaining an open, hub economy and country, especially in relation to skilled professionals and students from the EU. 
My report advocates several other steps to achieve this balanced outcome. They include: no automatic right of residence for EU citizens coming in the future; a “light-touch” five year work-permit for future EU professionals to be cleared in less than a month; more restrictive two year permits for unskilled workers with preference for those willing to work anti-social hours; creation of new temporary work programmes including in agriculture and for young people.
There is a bigger opportunity available too. The creaking British growth model has been based in the past generation on easy hire and fire and constant expansion of the labour supply, and it has thus become dependent on high levels of immigration (most from the EU is of low and middling skill level).
Ending free movement in a measured way is just what the low-productivity British economy needs. EU citizens make up about 7% of the UK workforce, rising to 17% in London, and some sectors such as food manufacturing (30%) and London house-building (56%) have become damagingly over-dependent on EU labour. 
These inflows over the last 15 years have underpinned economic growth but at some cost to British people in the bottom half of the income and educational spectrum: some irresponsible employers have sharply cut training budgets, while others have filled entire factories and warehouses with people from eastern Europe. 
And so long as already trained labour was flowing in from abroad there has been insufficient incentive for government and business to sort out our own education and training systems, especially for people at the bottom end of society (many from ethnic minorities). Yet this is key to both higher productivity and to renewing the national social contract with some of our most powerless citizens. We need to focus more on raising “the general competence of society” (as Christopher Lasch put it in his book The Revolt of the Elites) rather than sending everyone to university.
As Chris Bickerton of Cambridge University has written: “Immigration was a big issue in the referendum not because British people are xenophobic but because immigration is at the heart of the British growth model. As a result the UK experiences life in the EU single market through the prism of EU nationals coming to live and work in the UK.
“Other EU states, with different growth models, experience the EU single market in other ways: through violations of the labour code or through high levels of emigration.”
In this country there is a cultural aspect to this too. Freedom of movement has created a “neither one thing nor the other” category of resident: someone who is neither a temporary visitor/guest to a country, such as a tourist, nor someone who is making a permanent commitment to a new country in the manner of the traditional immigrant. The openness of free movement has also made it very hard for local and national authorities to plan for future population growth and infrastructure needs.
Nevertheless apart from that work permit requirement—light touch for skilled, much less so for unskilled—much continuity is possible and even when it comes to jobs and social rights future EU citizens should continue to have some limited special access to the UK labour market and welfare state as a symbol of the “deep and special” relationship the UK is seeking.
Britain will remain a welcoming society to future EU citizens, on top of the three million already here. Ending free movement is, however, a necessary (though not sufficient) condition for healing domestic wounds and nudging us onto a new growth path, ironically one that’s more like the higher-productivity continental economies.
Mass immigration has driven Britain into the economic doldrums. Here's how we fix it
Immigration in general, and EU free movement in particular, was one of the biggest factors behind the Brexit vote. A Brexit without a clear end to free movement in its current form is neither possible nor desirable.
But there are many ways of ending free movement, and if the government plays its cards right it can sharply reduce inflows, especially of unskilled workers, while remaining an open hub economy and country, especially in relation to skilled professionals and students from the EU. 
In a report published today for the think tank Policy Exchange, I advocate several steps to achieve this balanced outcome. They include: no automatic right of residence for EU citizens coming in the future; a “light-touch” five year work-permit for future EU professionals to be cleared in less than a month; more restrictive two year permits for unskilled workers with preference for those willing to work anti-social hours; continuing visa-free travel for tourism and continuity for EU students; and the creation of new temporary work programmes including in agriculture and for young people.
There is a bigger prize available too. Ending free movement in a measured way is exactly what the low-productivity British economy needs. EU citizens make up about 7 per cent of the UK workforce, rising to 17 per cent in London, and some sectors such as food manufacturing (30 per cent) and London house-building (56 per cent) have become damagingly over-dependent on EU labour. 
These inflows over the last 15 years have underpinned economic growth, but at some cost to British people in the bottom half of the income and educational spectrum. Some irresponsible employers have sharply cut training budgets while others have filled entire factories and warehouses with people from eastern Europe. 
Moreover, the creaking British growth model has been based in the past generation on expanding the labour supply, not in increasing productivity, and it has thus become dependent on high levels of immigration (most from the EU is of low and middling skill level).
As long as already trained labour was flowing in from abroad, there was insufficient incentive for government and business to sort out our own education and training systems, especially at the bottom end. Yet this is key to both higher productivity and to renewing the national social contract with some of our most powerless citizens.
As Chris Bickerton of Cambridge University has put it:
“Immigration was a big issue in the referendum not because British people are xenophobic but because immigration is at the heart of the British growth model. As a result the UK experiences life in the EU single market through the prism of EU nationals coming to live and work in the UK.” 
There is a cultural aspect to this too. Freedom of movement has created a “neither one thing nor the other” category of resident: someone who is neither a temporary visitor/guest to a country, such as a tourist, nor someone who is making a permanent commitment to a new country in the manner of the traditional immigrant.
Many of those taking advantage of free movement in recent years have enjoyed the rights of the latter with the attitude of the former, one reason free movement has been unpopular in many areas. The openness of free movement has also made it very hard for local and national authorities to plan for future population growth and infrastructure needs.
But what about the fear, voiced by Vince Cable and others, that ending free movement means we will become a kind of European North Korea, and our young people will no longer be able to move around Europe as they please?
This is fear-mongering. We will almost certainly continue with visa-free travel across the EU, and I propose that we should offer continuity in arrangements for EU students in terms of fees and access to the government loan system (in the expectation that European colleges will do the same). I also propose that we should extend the current Youth Mobility Visa that offers two year access to the UK for 18-30 year olds from places like Australia and Taiwan to all EU states, something that should allay the fears of the hospitality sector.
So apart from a work permit requirement, much continuity is possible, and even when it comes to jobs and social rights future EU citizens should continue to have some limited special access to the UK labour market and welfare state as a symbol of the “deep and special” relationship the UK is seeking.
Britain will remain a welcoming society to future EU citizens, on top of the 3 million already here. Ending free movement is, however, a necessary but not sufficient condition for healing domestic wounds and nudging us onto a new growth path – ironically one that is more like the higher-productivity continental economies.
Opinion | Why liberal societies need moderate nationalism
LONDON — The word “tribe” used to belong to humanity’s distant past, conjuring images of primitive men carrying spears or perhaps of the unchanged communities in the Amazon rainforest.
But now the language of tribes and tribalism is everywhere you look. And it’s a good thing, too. The return of the discussion of tribes is a metaphorical recognition of the shallowness of much of modern liberalism, with its awkwardness about the human need for recognition, belonging and group attachment, along with its implicit claim that society is just a random collection of individuals.
It is also a recognition of the weakening of the bigger, collective identities of nation, class and religion in recent decades and the rising importance of sub-groups, often value tribes of various kinds.
Value tribes are an unavoidable but often fragmenting reality of the modern world. A gulf has opened between the two big, loose value tribes that dominate western liberal societies. In my book “The Road to Somewhere,” I call these the people who see the world from “anywhere” and those who see it from “somewhere.”
“Anywhere” people, about 25 percent of the population, tend to be educated and mobile; they value openness, autonomy and individual self-realization. They tend to have careers rather than jobs and “achieved identities” based on academic and professional success.
“Somewheres,” about half of the population, are by contrast more rooted and less well-educated; they tend to value security, familiarity and group attachments (national or local) that Anywheres often don’t feel or respect. Somewheres generally have “ascribed identities” — their sense of themselves is more likely to come from the place they come from and the local ways of life they are attached to, which means that they are more likely to be discomforted by rapid social change.
This is just the primary value divide from which there are many offshoots and subdivisions. In real life, the story is less binary than it sounds, and there is a big group of about 25 percent of the population who share almost equally the two loose worldviews.
It is also important to remember that both of these worldviews are, at least in mainstream form, perfectly decent and legitimate. And if the task of modern politics in light of the great populist upsets of Brexit and Trump is to find a new settlement between the interests of Anywheres and Somewheres, then there is one key principle that must be accepted by both groups.
The principle is this: most forms of group attachment are compatible with the main liberal values of individual rights and human moral equality. To put it another way: the human desire to belong does not require hostility to outsiders.
It is true that some of the history of the 19th and 20th centuries did involve forms of nationalism based on exclusion and hostility toward outsiders, but a combination of greater wealth and security and several generations of liberal common sense has substantially reduced the danger of such militant nationalism.
Somewheres, I believe, understand this better than Anywheres. There are more extreme Somewheres who are genuinely authoritarian and xenophobic who reject most liberal values, but most of them have broadly gone along with the “great liberalization” of the past few decades on issues of race, gender and sexuality. They express a politics of decent populism.
Anywheres, by contrast, find it simple enough to accept the rights of strangers and the claims of equality, but they find it harder to understand group attachment. Especially in the United Kingdom, where I live, elite formation from the imperial era onwards has been partly about reducing attachment to place and group of origin to help fashion an effective, cohesive ruling class.
Mass higher education in the U.K. has adopted the residential forms of elite boarding schools and elite higher education. So, the vast majority of British students leave home at 18 to go to college and become absorbed into completely different social circles from their school and hometown. If they then pursue professional careers, they may never return home, working in London or maybe abroad for a few years and then settling down in places full of like-minded graduates.
This deracination of the educated class helps to explain the sharpness of the cultural divide over the Brexit vote — most of those who voted to remain in the European Union had no friends who voted for Brexit and vice-versa. Few graduates of elite universities have any close friends who are non-graduates. Because of this, the task of political reconciliation in our liberal societies is especially hard in the U.K. But the goal is simple enough: liberal pluralism tempered by the common good.
Neither militant liberals, who fear the masses are always teetering on the edge of new forms of authoritarianism, nor militant populists, who are hostile to diversity, find it easy to accept that many people live according to different norms. And, of course, it is possible to have too much fragmentation, which is why moderate nationalism remains such an important glue for liberal societies, reinforcing shared norms and social solidarity. Notwithstanding the increase in global interdependence, all the most important features of political society remain overwhelmingly national: the law, the welfare state, democracy — things that make us feel connected in a joint endeavor.
The Anywhere centrifugal forces in modern societies are strong: The Cold War is over, removing a common enemy; liberal individualism is the dominant ethos; high immigration and diversity have reduced trust and cohesion; identity politics has fragmented political action. The more rooted Somewheres provide a centripetal balance to these trends, and the reassertion of that voice is a welcome development, helping to combine modern liberalism with that age-old need for belonging. Moderate nationalism is the localism of a more globalized world and is the means to exercise some democratic control over that process.
Brit(ish): On Race, Identity and Belonging by Afua Hirsch - a review
 
 
This is a fierce polemic about the racial biases of British society interwoven with a memoir of the confusions of a mixed-race young woman, of Ghanaian and Jewish heritage, growing up in the 1980s and 1990s.
There is plenty to agree with in her critique of the evasions and embarrassments over race in Britain, which are often expressed as well-meaning colour blindness. This is a relatively open society but is far from being a post-racial one, either at the top or bottom.
In places, there is an interesting book struggling to get out, in the contrasting experiences of Hirsch and her working-class black British partner or the gulf in attitudes across the Ghanaian generations. But it is not a subtle or rigorous work, and is written in a style that has been called “expressive but not persuasive”.
I should declare an interest. Like Hirsch, I have been writing about race and immigration for many years and we have disagreed publicly. I am sceptical of what the African American writer John McWhorter calls the religion of anti-racism, of which Hirsch is a high priestess.
This is a case study of disaffected identity, shaped by a sense of exclusion that she positively seeks. Yet, on her own admission, her privileged start (private school and Oxford) and career success as a barrister and journalist, are a story of class trumping race.
And she weakens her own case by citing too much evidence of racism that sounds wrong or out of date, invariably arguing from anecdote, not data. So, apparently, Britain demands gratitude and assimilation from immigrants; black women are penalised for wearing their hair naturally, and we teach children about William Wilberforce but not the Atlantic slave trade (not true since 1988).
Author, Afua Hirsch
Of course, centuries of colonialism, slavery and the relative failure of the African continent has left scars on both white and black minds. “Whiteness” is a social default that non-whites have to adjust to in many small ways, but is it still an ideology of supremacy?
Do black people have it harder than other minorities? Probably, yes, but there is no clear discussion of this in her book nor of why black Africans have tended to do better in Britain than black Caribbeans who, conversely, are more successful in the US.
This is the problem with focusing so relentlessly on white racism: you deny agency to the many non-white groups that have arrived since 1950 with distinctive histories, priorities, attitudes to education and so on, and so cannot explain why some have flourished (East African Asians, Chinese, many Indians, some Africans) and others less so (Caribbeans and Pakistanis).
The religion of anti-racism also prevents any sort of minority self-criticism, yet black street culture must bear some responsibility for disproportionate levels of violent crime and single motherhood in black Britain.
Hirsch’s fluid definition of racism encourages victim status among minorities, and among whites creates either the evasions she complains of or resentment at being made to feel embarrassed over innocent attachments (including to national symbols such as Nelson’s column, which Hirsch wants pulled down).
A balance is required between a country’s desire to see itself in a good light and honesty about misdeeds of the past. Yet Hirsch constantly judges the distant past by the standards of the anti-racist present. Moreover, there is almost no acknowledgement of progress: the decline in racial intolerance, the rise of mixed-race Britain, the expanding minority middle class.
She offers no answers except that white people need to check their privilege more. But if young black people suffer now from negative stereotypes that need not be the case forever — consider how the image of Indians and Irish people has changed over recent decades.
Change will not come from the “society is to blame” approach of Hirsch and many white liberals. It is to the more creative parts of the minority elite — black and Asian conservatives and free-thinkers such as Trevor Phillips, Kemi Badenoch MP, Shaun Bailey, Munira Mirza and Tony Sewell — that one must look for direction.
Yes, they say, there are racial biases but we shall overcome, as others have in the past, not by asking for favours but by focusing on self-help, high expectations, educational success and holding Britain to its promises.
I agree with Hirsch that we want a more honest conversation about race but this book just replaces colour-blind dishonesty with victimhood.
Continental divides | The Spectator
 
What do Europeans really think about Brexit? Do they secretly admire our unexpected decision to walk away from all those pesky regulations and sub-committees? Or are our former ‘European friends’ relieved the arrogant, entitled Brits are leaving them alone?
The official response of the European political class is one of regret combined with studied indifference and a determination not to let Brexit weaken the project.
That, broadly, seems to be the unofficial response too. The EU, after a couple of decades of declining popularity and a rising populist challenge, has actually seen a small up-tick in popularity since Brexit, according to the Eurobarometer polling organisation.
Trust in the EU stands at 42 per cent, ten points up since 2015 and the highest level since 2010. A majority of Europeans (56 per cent) are now optimistic about the future of the EU, with the biggest increases in France, Denmark and Portugal. The wagons are circling in the face of a threat.
Not even EU populist parties are talking much about Brexit or recommending their countries emulate us — at least not yet. Marine Le Pen’s Front National has pulled back from its previous commitment to leave the euro.
Anyone foolish enough to vote for Brexit in the hope that it might shake up the EU and set it on a different course has, so far, been revealed as a hopeless idealist. In neither the French nor the German national elections last year did Brexit attract much attention. ‘In France, after the initial shock, Brexit has become a non-subject… and most French people now swing between complete indifference and bewilderment,’ says Sonia Delesalle-Stolper of Libération.
Nevertheless, the regret at Brexit is genuine enough in many places. It has several layers. It is a self-interested regret for the status of the EU itself and an acknowledgement that it is a blow to the club’s prestige — and its funding — that an important net-payer country like Britain should want to leave.
It is also a political regret on the part of countries such as Germany, the Netherlands and the Nordics, which shared some of our approach but were happy to allow us to take a front-of-house role in thwarting the more extreme plans for integration. As the unofficial leader of the non-eurozone countries, Britain was able to protect the interests of the mainly smaller countries not in the euro, which may now be more vulnerable.
There is, moreover, the genuine sadness of friends and admirers of Britain who really will miss us. I have found this on visits to both the Netherlands and Sweden since the Brexit vote. As one former Swedish politician put it to me: ‘We Nordics have always felt an affinity to the self-deprecating Brits, in contrast to the pompous Germans and haughty French.’
The most moving and, to the British ego, most flattering expression of regret I have received came from a Swedish friend who wrote this a few days after the referendum: ‘We Swedes think of you British as our kin folk. We admire you and emulate you — you are people we have learnt so much from… Brexit, to us, is rather like a family, where the eldest son goes off to university — and the little ones still at home are left wondering how the family will change, and what their admired big brother will be up to.’
But from my unscientific sample of friends and journalists across several large and small EU states that warm response is the exception. The regret in most countries is combined with bafflement and irritation, as noted in France, and even some anger.
It is common to find articles in publications such as Le Soir and Le Point which declare that Britain is over. ‘In some parts of the French elite Brexit is seen as a catastrophic mistake that will make you the new sick man of Europe,’ says Marc Roche, Le Monde’s former correspondent in London.
The European press tends to have a leftish bias — my Swedish politician estimates that 75 per cent of Swedish journalists support parties of the left — and likes to see Britain through Downton Abbey class stereotypes: Etonians leading a deluded working class.
Progressive Germans are among the most offended by Brexit as, more than most Europeans, they have transferred feelings of national pride from Germany to the EU. The two German public service broadcasters, ZDF and ARD, are obsessed by Brexit and resolutely negative about it.
Unsurprisingly, there has been a great deal of attention on the hate crime ‘spike’ after the Brexit vote, especially in the east European media. The new British xenophobia has been the subject of countless pieces of newspaper reportage and television documentaries across the continent, much of it exaggerated and ill-informed.
One might even detect a return of the Anglophobia of the imperial era with its stress on English or British hypocrisy: the domineering bully of a country congratulating itself on its gentlemanly liberalism.
In some cases Anglophobia emerged almost overnight after Brexit as the flipside of a jilted Anglophilia. Consider this charming analysis of Brexit from Diana Zimmermann, the correspondent for the German ZDF channel in London: ‘It is difficult to see Brexit as anything other than an expression of [British] superiority. We’re better off without you because we are better.’
But more often expressed is the less rancorous, and largely justified belief, that we Brits simply never ‘got’ the European project and it may be best for everyone concerned if we have a close relationship on the outside. Europe is a system of power and an economic mechanism but it is also a secular religion and the British have always been agnostics (we are now full-blown atheists).
For Britain the EU has been a cost-benefit calculation and, as a result of our different history and interests, we have never felt the emotional commitment to the EU that has come naturally to continental politicians and voters. As Angela Merkel said to David Cameron at a bilateral meeting in Berlin in 2012: ‘But your vision of the EU is so cold, David.’
The lack of much regret or sympathy across the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe is perhaps the most surprising aspect of the response. After all, these are the countries with the strongest suspicion of interference from Brussels or Berlin, as we saw in the refugee crisis. And, notwithstanding our Yalta betrayal, Britain has generally been held in high esteem both for leading the drive to bring these countries into the EU and then for opening our labour market, and country, to them earlier than any other big EU state.
It is a measure of Britain’s strategic failure to shape and lead an ‘outer ring’ for countries more concerned about national sovereignty that our leaving has caused so little concern on Europe’s eastern flank. Indeed it has not escaped notice there that we are leaving the EU precisely because they have joined it, bringing new waves of immigration and higher net payments.
A Romanian friend says that the view in his country is actually a complicated mixture of admiration and resentment, a bit like our own historic view of the US.
Still, the British decision to end freedom of movement is being taken rather personally in eastern Europe — despite the largely happy experience of eastern Europeans in this country — and we should not expect any quarter in the Brexit negotiations from the Visegrád countries.
The final word should go to my friend Jochen Buchsteiner of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung. Like most reasonable Germans, he is saddened by our exit and thinks it unnecessary given the ‘semi-detached’ status we already enjoyed. ‘Brexit does matter and it will weaken Britain, it will weaken the European Union and it will weaken Germany and make it harder to resist an eventual transfer union most Germans don’t want.’
But, he says, there is also a fear stalking the corridors of power in Germany and elsewhere. What if we flourish outside the EU? The Swedish politician I quoted told me that the editor of a top Swedish newspaper had said to her that if in five to ten years’ time Britain is doing fine, Sweden will probably leave, too. The EU will become the eurozone plus an outer ring of associated countries.
Maybe Britain is the canary in the mine, says Buchsteiner. ‘You have often been right in the past from Henry VIII to the decision to challenge Hitler. Perhaps, once again, you are seeing the future more clearly.’
The age of incivility | The Spectator
 
How long ago it now seems that the big political worry was apathy. Today, wherever you look — Brexit negotiations, US politics, the latest news from Europe — the talk is only of polarisation, division and a coarsening of political behaviour and language. According to a Ipsos MORI survey, most Europeans believe their countries are more polarised than ten years ago.
But are we really as divided as the new consensus presumes? What if recent political trends represent instead a long overdue rebalancing of interests after nearly 30 years of liberal domination — both economic and social — favouring the affluent and educated, and so a case of democracy not failing but working (albeit not to the taste of most of the political class)?
Despite the success of populist parties across Europe, many of them participating in governments — in Rome, Vienna and elsewhere — there has been no obvious threat to democracy, minority rights or the rule of law (with the arguable exception of a divided Poland and a majoritarian Hungary).
And are we not guilty of ‘presentism’, of too readily assuming the situation today is without parallel? But, in Britain, what about the polarising figure of Margaret Thatcher or the physical violence of the mid-1980s miners’ strike and the later poll tax riots? Describing Tories as ‘lower than vermin’ was not an over-enthusiastic young Momentum activist but Aneurin Bevan in 1948.
Moreover, there is actually quite a broad consensus on many of the most fundamental questions of British public life: in economics there is wide support for a regulated market economy flanked by a big state (with relatively minor disagreement between left and right about how big the state should be). In politics there is similarly wide support for representative democracy and governments that place a high value on fairness and diversity. These basics comfortably command a super-majority.
It is true that weak salary growth over the past decade has cast a zero-sum pall over politics and there is evidence of austerity fatigue, benefiting Labour at the last election. But class feeling is weaker than it was in the recent past, with more than half the population opting for no class at all, when unprompted, according to the British Social Attitudes survey.
Even on sociocultural issues the divergence is less than it sometimes appears because the great liberalisation of recent decades on race, gender and sexuality has been so triumphant. Many liberals seem reluctant to acknowledge this — suffering from what the Harvard academic Steven Pinker has called ‘progressophobia’ — and are nostalgic for the time in the 1960s when Roy Jenkins and others provided moral leadership against majority opinion on issues such as capital punishment and race equality legislation.
And yet the polarisation thesis clearly captures something real. Looming over our politics is the world-view divide I described in my book The Road to Somewhere, between the people who see the world from Anywhere (about one quarter of the population) and the people who see the world from Somewhere (about half the population). The first are the educated and mobile, who favour openness and autonomy and are broadly comfortable with social change, the second are the settled and less qualified, favouring familiarity and small-c conservatism and tend to see change as loss.
Both of those world views are perfectly decent and legitimate but for various reasons, partly to do with the expansion of higher education, economic change and the disproportionate weight of London, the divide between them has become sharper in recent years. It has created a new values version of the 1970s economic stalemate between the broad middle class and organised labour. This new stalemate could hardly be better illustrated than by the present quagmire of the Brexit negotiations — a Somewhere policy being delivered by reluctant Anywheres.
The great prize of British politics will go to whoever can forge a new consensus between the two broad value groups. In the meantime, we are living in a transitional period in which differences are exacerbated by social media and now polarised political groups.
The upshot has, indeed, been a coarsening of our public discourse in which, as the Prime Minister put it, it is ‘becoming harder to disagree without also demeaning opposing viewpoints in the process’.
It is now a commonplace that a smaller number of people with extreme views have a disproportionate voice, thanks to the social media megaphone. Social media has encouraged the purveyors of abuse. Where once it required a certain level of motivation and temerity to publicly heckle someone or even write a poison-pen letter, buy a stamp and put it in the post, today the ‘barriers to entry’ are close to zero. And anonymity is also guaranteed.
In the US the new political style preceded the arrival of social media. Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt in How Democracies Die tracked the erosion there over the past two decades of the unwritten democratic norms of mutual toleration and forbearance and the growing conviction that political opponents are not rivals, but enemies to be destroyed.
This was pioneered by the right in the US but has been echoed in the moralistic intransigence of the modern left. It is no longer enough to disagree with one’s political opponents, it has become necessary to impute morally repugnant motives, especially to those on the right. This politics of rage was evident in the wake of the Grenfell disaster — described by John McDonnell as ‘social murder’ — and again after the recent Windrush scandal, painted by David Lammy as a deliberate act of racial exclusion.
But this is part of a wider shift. Race, gender and sexuality have partly eclipsed older socioeconomic divides. At its worst, this produces a rights- and resentment-based politics in which only women can speak for women, minorities for their particular group, and any discrepancy in minority representation is seen as proof of discrimination. In this way, noble liberal ideas curdle into something sour and sectarian.
Yet we should not panic for the political future, because in many ways we have got what we wished for. This is how a liberal society with divergent values and low moral consensus functions, whether in the politics of minority resentment, Corbynite leftism or in the Brexit push-back against economic and social openness.
Moreover, the common ground of politics is not as shaky as it sometimes seems. Most people in politics remain open to cooperation, with the exception of some of those Corbynite outriders. Even most of the Somewheres who voted for Brexit are ‘decent populists’ who accept gay marriage and race equality. A successful political settlement will need to find ways of marrying modern liberalism with their small-c conservatism.
Something has, however, gone wrong with the style and tone of our politics — perhaps best summed up as cultural intransigence exacerbated by social media — and we can begin to fix that with more active stigmatisation of extreme language and sentiments. That means all of us doing our bit to stand up for civility.
Review: Bullshit Jobs: A Theory by David Graeber — a slim essay strung out to 300 pages
David Graeber hates marketing but he seems pretty good at it. In 2013 the LSE anthropology professor wrote a slim essay for a leftist magazine on the growth of apparently pointless jobs in finance, marketing and administration — so called “bullshit jobs”. This mundane water-cooler observation of the bored office worker struck a chord and was read by over 1m people, prompting Graeber to manufacture his own little “bullshit” industry.
Declaring his thesis brave and original, he persuaded one of Britain’s top publishers to stretch the essay into a 300-page book. Meanwhile a YouGov opinion poll inspired by his essay found that 37% of British workers thought their jobs made no meaningful contribution to the world.
The book itself does not contain an objective definition of what a bullshit job is beyond one that the job holder thinks is “pointless, unnecessary or even pernicious”. The jobs that Graeber places in the bullshit box tend to be the ones you’d expect a self-styled anarchist professor to dislike, jobs associated with managerial hierarchy such as human resources professionals, with corporate law and finance (99% useless according to Graeber) and the influence industry of lobbying, marketing and advertising.
And his “research” for the book turns out to be the accounts he attracted from about 250 people who liked his bullshit job thesis so much they provided 110,000 words of commentary on it, some of which is scattered through the text. Few of them do the actual bullshit jobs; most of them come across as clever people bored with their work.
The book starts with Kurt, who works for an IT company that works for the German army. Kurt has one particularly daft task that involves him travelling a long distance to move a soldier’s computer three rooms down a corridor, something that the soldier could easily have done himself. But this does not prove that Kurt’s job in general is pointless, though he might not like it very much.
This is not a book for the fastidious. There is no intellectual precision and there are almost no facts beyond obviously false anecdotal ones such as that 80% of nurses’ time is now taken up with administration. Graeber implies that people are working longer hours but for most people that is not the case and, looking at working time as a proportion of a whole life-span, people now work far less than they did 40 years ago.
It is also not true that most people don’t like their jobs, bullshit or not bullshit. According to the 2015 British Social Attitudes survey, 71% of workers think they have a good job.
 
The corporate machine: an opinion poll inspired by Graeber’s thesis found that 37% of British workers thought their jobs made no meaningful contribution to the world
We humans like to be involved in purposeful action and also want to be valued by others in our private and work lives. But since the development of wage labour, most jobs have been primarily seen as a means to the end of earning the money to live, though some craft and professional jobs, along with uniformed public service roles, have been accorded intrinsic value and respect.
The decline of skilled manual employment may have reduced the number of occupations with an element of job satisfaction and purpose but the growth of higher professional jobs might have counter-balanced that. Who knows? Graeber certainly doesn’t. He believes there has been a big rise in pointless jobs but fails to provide evidence or reasons beyond the claim that the ruling class wants to keep everyone busy and out of trouble.
If there has been a growth in bullshit jobs it probably has something to do with more complex divisions of labour, as The Economist pointed out, which make it harder for the worker to see where they fit in. It may also be a side-effect of more state regulation.
This is a potentially important subject and Graeber is right that markets do not themselves confer meaning, but his own analysis is too narrowly political, rather puritanical too. Jobs that he doesn’t approve of he declares bullshit regardless of their actual content. So people who make frivolous fancy goods, the entire private medical insurance sector in America, plus anyone who administers means-tested benefits, are all doing bullshit jobs because in some idealised future the jobs would not be needed.
There are a few flashes of interest: the theories of early 20th-century psychologist Karl Groos on play and self worth, a mini-essay on moral envy and an original take on the left-right spectrum: “The mainstream left controls the production of humans. The mainstream right controls the production of things.”
Graeber’s answer to the bullshit job problem is basic income, a modest income for every citizen that removes the need to work. This remains prohibitively expensive and underestimates the extent to which work provides meaning and companionship. The more obvious answer is to do what the best employers already do, which is to give recognition, voice and a sense of being a valued team member to all workers.
Ultimately this is, well, rather a bullshit book, a product of the kind of hyperbolic marketing of which the author so disapproves.
Review: The House of Islam: A Global History by Ed Husain — why Islam must expel its extremists
 
The House of Islam is a plea for the renewal of classical, traditional Islam against its extreme and politicised versions. Ed Husain, the author of the 2007 bestseller The Islamist, is well placed to make this argument. He used to be a religious extremist — in the early Nineties he was seduced by Islamic radicals at college in east London. He later broke with them and set up the anti-extremism think tank Quilliam.
Instead of edging towards secularism, though, Husain has delved deeper into the faith of his birth, spending time in Syria and Saudi Arabia, learning Arabic and reading the Islamic classics. He also spent time with the US policy elite at the Council on Foreign Relations, a think tank in Washington DC. “I have the rare privilege,” he says, “of being an insider both in the West and in the Muslim world.”
His criticisms of western missteps towards the Islamic world — too tolerant of anti-Rushdie-style intolerance in the diaspora while too often backing the most autocratic forces in the name of stability — are familiar. More challengingly, he chides the modern, secular, liberal mind for its inability to understand the religious one. Within the western tradition, he identifies as a Burkean conservative against what he sees as destructive libertarian secularism; he uses the phrase “liberal individualism” as a term of mild abuse.
The first section of the book is an informative trip through Islamic history. He tells the story of the Prophet, the Koran, the Sunni-Shia split, the Sharia rules that regulate Muslim life and so on. He describes a confident, undogmatic faith that from the 8th to the 18th century was also intertwined with the passionate Sufi mystical tradition that produced much of Islam’s art and poetry, from Rumi to Omar Khayyam.
His rather idealised version of the Sufi pluralist tradition — he calls it the compassionate soul of Islam — may not have been quite as dominant as he claims. In the Mughal empire in India, he concedes, a more sectarian version of faith prevailed under the emperor Aurangzeb, who ruled from 1658-1707. “He gave birth to fanaticism,” Husain says — and his legacy set the scene for the bloodbath of partition in 1948.
Islam’s cultural and scientific golden age was already on the wane in the 15th century when the printing press was banned in the Ottoman empire as a tool of the Devil. However, it was Napoleon’s invasion of Egypt in 1798 that began two centuries of humiliation at the hands of the West. In India, Shah Zafar, the last Mughal ruler, was toppled by the British in 1857 and exiled to Burma. As a final insult to a family who had reigned for more than 300 years, he was buried in an unmarked grave behind a jail in Rangoon.
The end of the First World War marked a new low. Husain points out how the collapse of three empires led to different forms of extremism: the Russian led to communism, the Austro-Hungarian to Nazism and the Ottoman to Islamism, a narrowly politicised form of the faith. The French and British imperialists carved up the Ottoman empire in, Husain says, a “shortsighted and arbitrary way”, depriving Muslims of a caliph for the first time. These humiliations provoked various forms of political Islam as espoused by Abul A’la Maududi (the founder of the Jamaat-e-Islami movement in the Indian subcontinent) and the Egyptians Sayyid Qutb, the intellectual godfather of al-Qaeda, and Hasan al-Banna, the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood.
For 1,400 years Muslim literature — until the 20th century — had little to say about politics and there was no agreement on what constituted an Islamic state. Moreover, most Muslim jurists, and Muslims, had accepted the principle that everything was halal (permitted) unless expressly deemed haram (forbidden). Now the Islamists, Salafists and assorted literalists and puritans, including the dominant Wahhabi strain in Saudi Arabia, broke with that easy-going version of the faith, wanting to impose their reading of Sharia as state law.
This is the key difference between Islamists and ordinary Muslims. “Most Muslims agree that drinking alcohol and homosexuality are forbidden by Sharia (although both are open to permissive interpretations). For Islamists, these acts should be made illegal and punished by the state in this world. This was not the historical attitude of most Muslims. In 700 years of Ottoman history there was only one case of an adulterer being stoned in public,” Husain says.
The Islamist and Salafist strands of Islam represent only a small proportion of the world’s 1.7 billion Muslims, but through their violent offshoots, such as Islamic State, they attract disproportionate attention. Husain wants the violent extremists expelled from the Muslim family as the Kharijites were in the early days of the religion. “The House of Islam is on fire — and the arsonist still lives there . . . Muslims must expel the fire bombers in their midst,” he says. He also argues that the 250-year-old alliance between the Saudi royal family and Wahhabi clerics should be nullified.
“We need to cleanse our mosques, publishing houses, schools, websites, satellite TV stations, madrassas and ministries of Salafi-jihadi influences. Unless we do, Islamophobia will continue to rise . . . and we cannot credibly claim that they have nothing to do with us,” he says. He proposes a regional union in the Middle East, akin to the EU (with Iran and Saudi Arabia settling their differences just as Germany and France did) and a Marshall Plan funded by the West and the richer Arab states to raise the global status of Muslims.
He paints such a bleak picture of the modern Middle East, however, that it is hard to see where the impulse for this will come. He points out that from 1980 to 2000, while Israel registered 7,652 patents, the Arab Middle East could muster only a few hundred. And he graphically describes the region’s neurotic attitude to sex with its subjugation and harassment of women (the latter he saw first-hand through the treatment of his wife), with some of the highest rates for downloading porn in the world. The fragile Arab male ego may even have triggered the Arab Spring. Mohamed Bouazizi, the Tunisian street trader whose self-immolation led to the rising, was pushed over the edge by a public slap from a female police officer.
Husain’s one flicker of optimism for the Middle East also comes from Tunisia in the shape of Rachid al-Ghannouchi. Hus-ain argues that his Ennahda movement has jettisoned Islamism and evolved into a Muslim version of a European Christian Democratic party. Ghannouchi’s apparent influence over Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s AK party in Turkey suggests this may be too generous an account.
For anyone interested in the future of Islam, both in Britain and the Islamic world, this is an important book. The idea that Wahhabi influence can be “nullified” seems like wishful thinking. But maybe some collective rejection of the inhuman priorities of the extremists is more feasible. These are people, after all, who believe that “consuming and defending the consumption of a bacon sandwich puts a Muslim outside the faith, then why not murder, rape and enslavement”, as Husain puts it.
Husain’s writing can be little old-fashioned (“she was a wise and constant counsellor”) but his style reflects his pious temperament. And it is the combination of deep religious commitment and western reformist politics that makes him such an necessary figure.
How Britain Really Works by Stig Abell - review
 
 
Stig Abell is an unusual figure in British life. He is a leading member of the literary intelligentsia — he edits one of its key publications, the Times Literary Supplement — but also spent three years working in a senior job at The Sun newspaper and presented a popular phone-in on LBC.
I like the man’s CV and I really wanted to like his book. Alas, he has written the wrong one. He is perfectly placed to reflect on the gulf in worldview between the purveyors of high and popular culture in Britain but he has reached for something even bigger and tripped up. There are three big problems with the book (for all of which his publisher should take a share of the blame).
First, is the title. If you buy a book called How Britain Really Works you expect some depth and originality. But this is actually a bluffer’s guide-cum-cuttings job of recent British history written in a chatty style that only sometimes rises above the jocular. (To be fair, Abell himself hints at the absurdity of the title in a footnote.)
Second, the first four chapters on economics, politics, health and education are exactly what you would expect from a Leftish literary person who take his views from The Guardian. This is, with a few caveats, the voice of a centre-Left Establishment that thinks it is the rebellious anti-Establishment.
Third, the book is littered with errors of fact and judgement that are in many cases so fundamental that they make you question almost everything he writes. He thinks Britain is the 116th largest manufacturing economy in the world when in fact we are eighth or ninth; productivity, which usually increases by about two per cent a year in a rich economy did not, as he claims, increase by 26 per cent in 2000; juries convict, not acquit, as he says, in about 65 per cent of cases; the non-white British population is about 20 per cent, not 13 per cent. And so on.
Moreover, he misdefines securitisation; he claims local authorities were purchasers of NHS services in the first purchaser-provider split (they have nothing to do with the NHS, though they do run social care); he thinks the fact that Britain is a low-investment economy is hardly ever discussed — which shows he has had his nose in novels more than economic analyses for the past few decades. The cartoonish account in these chapters of a Britain ruled by stupid politicians and greedy bankers is relieved only by flashes of illuminating autobiography.
Things do pick up about halfway through, with chapters on the military, law and order and old and new media. In the latter chapter he really does know what he’s talking about as he had a front row seat throughout the phone-hacking scandal (first as a press regulator and then as The Sun’s managing editor).
The military chapter is the book’s most absorbing because he approaches the subject with humility and indulges his real interest: human feeling rather than the ideas and institutions of the book’s subtitle. (He also points out that the unheralded Palestine conflict remains the most costly in British military lives since 1945 at 784.)
He is a good phrase-maker: the prison system, like other areas of policy, is “an odd mix of politics, precedent and emotion”. And there are several insights that hit the mark: why combating obesity struggles to replicate the success of the anti-smoking drive; the awful state of women’s medical treatment before the NHS; how little extra The Sun earned from big scoops while he was there (no more than £50,000).
He also successfully challenged my own, hitherto, rather dismissive view of the transgender (or gender dysphoria) question with his very clear and sensitive discussion of the issue.
I was a Remainer, but I'm sick of the economic doom and gloom – Brexit is an exciting opportunity to do things differently
The EU’s threat to exclude Britain from its Galileo space programme, which is building a European version of America’s GPS system, has upset the Government.
Given Theresa May’s red lines, some sort of Galileo renegotiation was always going to be required, yet even pro-Remain ministers like Greg Clark have been angered by the manner in which the EU proposes to lock Britain out of the most militarily sensitive parts of the system. After all, even after Brexit, Britain will remain “a European liberal democracy, with almost identical security interests to the remaining EU countries”, as Sophia Besch of the Centre for European Reform puts it – so it is odd to treat us as a strategic rival.
Behind the dispute probably lies French interest in space technology contracts that British companies have been winning. Yet it is a sharp reminder that more than economic growth is at stake in Brexit.
Before it is too late we need to focus on those areas of policy where we can, potentially, regain national control
One response to the EU threat would be to build our own satellite network. Russia, China, India and Japan are building them; why not Britain too? We are not only a strategic superpower with our Trident nuclear deterrence and GCHQ, we are also a leader in space technology. “If Brexit is about Britain refinding its mojo then this is just the sort of thing we should be thinking about,” says David Willetts, who when a minister in the Cameron government did much to promote the space industry.
I have no idea whether that makes sense or not, but I do wish the debate about Brexit could be lifted above the intricacies of future trade arrangements. Of course economics matters and it seems unavoidable that there will be – indeed there already has been – some economic cost from leaving the EU. But every time I turn on the radio or television, as I did on Saturday to listen to the BBC’s Any Questions, there is Andrea Leadsom focusing again on why it is vital to be outside the Customs Union to make our own trade deals while Emily Thornberry counters, yet again, that we must stay in for “jobs and growth”. And when I debated Andrew Adonis in Oxford last week about his plans for overturning the referendum his key points were that exit would make us poorer and that the Government would not have the “bandwidth” to deal with anything else for several years.
I voted Remain but like most moderate Remainers I accept that the other side won and now just want the best possible deal. I am agnostic on the Customs Union but increasingly frustrated by how uber-Remainers have framed the whole debate around the economic costs of Brexit. 
Before it is too late we need to focus on those areas of policy where we can, potentially, regain national control and change the way we do things. That will not only raise the spirits by reminding us of some of the good reasons why we have taken this momentous step, it will also better inform the key Brexit trade-off: do we retain close regulatory alignment to minimise economic disruption but thereby forgo our potential freedoms, or should we grasp those freedoms and risk an economic hit at least in the short term? Almost the only area where there has been some debate about post-Brexit freedoms so far has been in farming and fisheries, which impacts a small part of the population. It is time we extended the conversation.
Ending free movement will put pressure on employers and the Government to train enough of our young people for the millions of unglamorous but vital jobs that need doing
Take state aid. For “level playing field” reasons this is closely controlled in the EU, which prevents us adopting a serious regional or industrial policy. We cannot, for example, boost growth in the north east or South Wales by, say, waiving corporation tax for five years. Rohan Silva, an enthusiastic Remainer, recently described how when he was a Treasury adviser an ambitious state-backed venture capital plan for new hi-tech companies was rejected by Brussels. When we leave the EU, we should be able to experiment in this way.
Or what about public procurement? Thanks in part to corruption in southern Europe we get lumbered with unnecessarily stringent rules on bidding for public contracts, which hugely favours big companies. When we leave, we can redesign the rules so they don’t always favour contracting out to conglomerates like Carillion. We could also expand the so-called Preston model in which local institutions — the police, universities, NHS trusts — pledge to spend a proportion of their budgets locally.
On immigration, thanks to free movement Britain has been “employer of last resort” for eastern and southern Europe in recent years. This has boosted GDP, but mainly through higher population, while at the same time undermining middling-skill training of the UK population. Almost half of building workers in London are from the EU and we started barely 10,000 construction apprenticeships last year. Ending free movement will finally place the training and post-school education of all those who don't go to university at the top of the national agenda, as we seek to fill the millions of unglamorous but vital jobs that need doing.
When it comes to innovation, meanwhile, there are many opportunities to do things differently, from GM crops to recycling rules to data protection – all areas where the EU imposes its risk-averse caution on us.
Brexit is an opportunity to re-boot Britain in important ways
There is no domestic consensus (in either main party) on how to use our post-Brexit sovereignty in some of these areas, which is perhaps why politicians have been shy about raising the issues. It is even said that Theresa May plans to surrender state aid freedoms outside the EU in order to stymie a potential Corbyn government (it was, after all, British Conservatives who wanted such strict state aid rules in the first place). 
But we need a dose of Brexit imagination – and a far less narrowly trade-focused debate – so we have a better idea of what sort of balance to strike in that great trade-off. Germany, for example, now spends three times the UK in state aid – could we raise our spending to German levels while still honouring a pledge to stick to current state aid arrangements?
Brexit is an opportunity to re-boot Britain, with the complaints of Leave voters in mind. We need to talk about how our potential freedoms might contribute to that – or we risk waking up after Brexit to find we have given them all away.
Notes on a scandal | 3 May 2018 | The Spectator
 
The idea that left vs right has been replaced by open vs closed is one of the most self-serving conceits of contemporary politics. I have never met anyone who wants to live in a closed society, but I have met plenty of people who think that the forms of openness of the past couple of decades have not served their interests.
Factories and offices have moved abroad. EU free movement has brought a new workforce to compete with the one already here, and an extra four million people overall have arrived in the past 15 years, while wages have barely grown. Combine that with open public services and an estimated illegal migration population of at least 500,000 and you can see why so many people have not needed Nigel Farage’s help to worry about borders.
One such person is a British Caribbean ex-serviceman, Vince McBean, who appeared last week on a Channel 4 news special on the Windrush scandal to report that despite being wounded in action he had to pay £90 for his British passport. Departing from the programme’s narrative he also blurted out his resentment against the Europeans ‘who come over here and benefit from our hard work’.
It is not just the white majority who want a return to more modest levels of immigration and a sense that the authorities have some control over who is here. Working-class black and Asian Brits often share the same sense of being pushed aside by the high inflows that have become too central to Britain’s economic growth model.
It is also minorities and recent immigrants who are most likely to be disadvantaged by illegal immigration. Illegality, higher here than in comparable countries, is not only unfair on legal immigrants who wait their turn and the businesses who play by the rules, but it fosters as well a twilight world of criminality and exploitation. A 2013 poll found that 82 per cent of people want stronger action to remove illegals.
It is worth rehearsing these basic points as the many enemies of the more stringent border controls introduced in May’s time as home secretary (2010-2016) jump on the Windrush bandwagon with a view to undoing her achievements. It is also worth pointing out that the Home Office has become a very different place in recent years. One official I know recalled joining in the early 1990s ‘when it was completely white and very right-wing’.
Small-c conservative attitudes remain in parts of the department and there were some people who grumbled about Amber Rudd’s more permissive approach. But having spent some time in recent months mixing with immigration officials at several different locations, and levels of seniority, I have been impressed by their generally humane attitudes. As one of them put it to me: ‘A lot of the immigration offenders we pick up are victims too.’
The Home Office reflects the ethnic mix and views of the country. The London-based illegal immigration enforcement team I witnessed in action earlier this year was half white and half black and Asian, led by a charismatic British Nigerian woman.
They were raiding shops and restaurants in Thornton Heath, south London, based on tip-offs from the public, looking for illegal workers. They usually find plenty —although just two when I was with them.
The Windrush scandal has left many people with the impression that deporting people from Britain is easy. That is not how it looks from the front line where a combination of resource constraints (lack of detention centre space), legal reform (human rights law) and political obstruction (countries of origin refusing to accept returns) makes it feel like the system is ‘broken’, as one regional director described it.
That’s an exaggeration. The number of deportations rose from 25,000 in 2004 to 45,000 in 2013, though it has trailed off a bit in recent years and there has been a steep decline in the number of forced removals — last year it was just 12,321, and half were prisoners. (The top three countries for deportations are all white European: Romania, Albania and Poland.)
One big reason forced deportations are harder is that asylum claims can be spun out until an individual has been here for more than two years and can then try to claim family life protection under human rights law.
These obstacles explain why all governments in recent times, but especially Theresa May’s Home Office, tried to nudge illegals to the door via the now-to-be-renamed ‘hostile environment’—meaning that, mimicking a European ID card system, people have to prove their legal status when opening a bank account, renting a flat, using the NHS, taking a job and so on.
But it has also come to mean the general shift to a more controlled border. Some of this is surely welcome: we issue 2.6 million visas a year and thanks to tighter procedures, especially for students, the number of visa over-stayers has declined sharply. We have seen, too, the successful rolling out of Biometric Residence Permits (BRPs) for non-EU people here more than six months.
It is too early to tell whether the more intense hostile environment policy, legislated in 2014 and 2016, is making any difference. Critics claim that it merely drives people further underground. In any case, the Windrush scandal has ensured that the hostile environment now faces a hostile environment of its own.
The pro-mass-immigration NGOs, and some people in the Home Office itself, did warn that requiring more people to prove their status created two big problems. First, the people who were most likely to be asked to prove their status would be people who did not look or sound like the ethnic majority, though around half are likely to be white.
The bigger problem is the one we are all now familiar with: no thought was given to historical anomalies, above all the Commonwealth citizens who were given indefinite leave to remain in 1971 but could not prove it. The vast majority of such people can prove their status but there is a small remnant of maybe a few thousand who cannot, most of them belonging to the 30,000-plus group of older Commonwealth citizens who do not own a passport.
The fact that this remnant, for various reasons, is mainly composed of British Caribbeans, the totemic post-war immigrant group towards whom white Britain feels a mixture of affection and guilt, has made the outrage about their harassment even greater.
There will be further apologising and compensating to come but it is worth considering what Sajid Javid should now do to reform the hostile environment without returning to the more laissez-faire border that Theresa May inherited.
The first and most obvious thing is to create a clear distinction in the status-checking process and the Home Office procedures between recent and long-standing residents (plus their children). Anyone in the latter category should get the benefit of the doubt, and of an independent ombudsman attached to the Home Office if there is a genuine question about their right to be here.
Windrush, plus Brexit, provides an opportunity to grasp a bigger nettle. There is a large group of people, maybe 200,000, who are here illegally (though they may have arrived legally on a visa) but have survived 10 years or more. Many are people with forged identity documents who did not have to take up BRPs in 2008.
They are often well-integrated, with National Insurance and NHS numbers. They are the sort of people who become the focus of community ‘let them stay’ campaigns. And we should let them stay. A general amnesty would send the wrong signal and would encourage a surge of would-be illegal entrants but we should restore the rule that legalises anyone who has been here for 10 years — and who has not committed a serious crime.
At the same time, to signal that the government is not letting up on illegal immigration, Sajid Javid should ensure that the Home Office moves more swiftly to deport people after asylum appeals have failed, rather than waiting for a judicial review to be lodged. This is where it would be sensible to have targets.
And illegal immigration should be re-framed as a fairness issue, connected not only to anti-trafficking initiatives but to better enforcement of minimum-wage legislation, private-landlord licensing and so on. Without rogue employers, illegal immigration would scarcely exist. Most employers, especially in London, are now aware of the importance of checks and of the £20,000 fine for hiring an illegal. Yet of the £50 million in the more than 3,000 fines levied in 2016, only £16 million had been collected in early 2018.
We are in the middle of a slow shift from a low documentation society to an ID card one and from a laissez-faire to a more controlled border. The dim-witted, automatic-pilot implementation of the illegal immigration policy that led to the recent scandal was a mistake not an inevitable consequence of that shift, as so many border-sceptics gleefully claim. Sajid Javid should not abandon the policy but learn from the mistakes.
Home Office incompetence on Windrush is no reason to end the hostile environment against illegal migrants
The Home Office, like any organisation, makes mistakes. Home Office mistakes, however, can be existential for the people involved. It evidently made a big mistake in being unaware of the “Windrush anomaly” – children of first-wave Caribbean immigrants who had been granted permanent residence in 1971 but in many cases had never acquired proper documentation.
As the Government, rightly, tries to bear down on the corrosive, anti-social phenomenon of illegal immigration, many of those British Caribbeans got caught up in the “hostile environment” (better name, please) campaign against illegals and found themselves unable to prove their right to be here. The problem has now been acknowledged, but overnight much of the work that a Tory government has been doing to improve its standing with black Britons – the Race Disparity Audit, greater sensitivity on stop and search – has been jeopardised.
The oversight was probably down to an absence of institutional memory combined with a lack of people with relevant life experience at the top of the department. It seemed obvious that something was afoot when the first stories began to emerge at the end of last year, and to many black Britons it will confirm, rightly or wrongly, a sense of second-class citizenship.
But we should recall why the hostile environment was introduced and why it should not suffer collateral damage from this example of Whitehall’s tin ear.
There are probably close to 1 million people living in the UK illegally and they are being added to at the rate of 70,000 or 80,000 a year
Britain has an illegal immigration problem. It has been overshadowed by arguments about historically high levels of legal immigration. But there are probably close to 1 million people living in the UK illegally and they are being added to at the rate of 70,000 or 80,000 a year – a combination of visa over-stayers (40,000 to 50,000), people smuggled in on lorries (10,000) and people refused asylum who nevertheless stay (about 20,000).
They usually live in a limbo world, undermining social trust and decent standards in the job market, and are often themselves victims of exploitation. This is where the PM’s interest in a secure border intersects with her modern slavery agenda.
This video content is no longer available
To watch The Telegraph's latest video content please visit youtube.com/telegraph
Recently, I spent a day with a Home Office enforcement team who, working from tip-offs from the public, raided shops and restaurants in the Croydon area to apprehend illegal immigrants. The dozen team members – half white and half black and Asian – rightly believe themselves to be performing an important public service. One of the team pointed out to me that “many migration offenders are also victims”.
But it is frustrating work because of the obstacles to removals. Although enforcement costs £500 million a year and employs 5,000, only about 12,000 people were removed against their will last year and half were criminals. Another 18,000 people left voluntarily but that is probably less than half the number that is being added to the illegal total each year.
Human rights law gives people an incentive to spin out the asylum process in the hope that they can then qualify under the right to family life
Why is it so hard to remove people? Partly because human rights law gives people an incentive to spin out the asylum process in the hope that they can then qualify under the right to family life. There is now only one right of asylum appeal but many claimants will then put in for judicial review. Other problems include too few detention centres and non-cooperation of countries of origin.
It is partly for this reason that the Government introduced the hostile environment in 2014 as an alternative “nudge” policy to promote voluntary departure – requiring people to prove their status to open a bank account, rent a flat, use the NHS and so on.
Some of this goes against the grain for a country that has, historically, had a low level of personal documentation and many public-sector professionals do not like being turned into “border guards”. But if we want to have a high number of people flowing across our borders, and also want to control that flow, and access to jobs and public services, the border must come inland.
One lesson of the Windrush anomaly is that we need a swifter, more sensitive appeal process in the Home Office. Another lesson is that we need to reopen the debate about ID cards or digital citizen identity so that people who are legally here, including three million EU citizens, do not have to go on proving it.
Enoch Powell, the prophet of doom who clutches at us still
 
Almost 50 years ago, just after 2.30pm on April 20, 1968, Enoch Powell rose to his feet in a dreary Birmingham hotel room to deliver the most memorable speech by any opposition politician since 1945. With its dramatic imagery of racial conflict and predictions of rivers of blood and “the black man holding the whip hand over the white man”, the 30-minute jeremiad on mass immigration by one of Britain’s most eloquent and intellectually gifted politicians seems to belong to a different age. Its language and sentiments about race would have been more familiar to someone 50 years earlier, in 1918, than to someone today.
But, whether we know it or not, we all live with the shadow that it cast over the politics of race and immigration in Britain, above all in the way it polarised opinion and made it harder over the next few decades to conduct a balanced but honest national debate about the costs and benefits, both economic and cultural, of large-scale immigration. And we continue to argue, albeit in a very different tone, about the eternal problems of ethnicity, allegiance and national community that Powell raised.
The speech had several immediate effects. It led to Powell being sacked from the shadow cabinet by the Tory leader, Ted Heath, with Margaret Thatcher one of the few dissenting voices, and was the beginning of the end of his career as a front-rank Conservative politician. But in the country at large there was widespread support for Powell and his demand to stop the inflows of black and Asian immigrants — then running at 50,000 people a year, mainly in the form of family reunion — and to encourage repatriation.
The spasm of racial anxiety that Powell unleashed led to London dockers marching in his support, opinion polls giving him backing of 70% or more and 110,000 fan letters landing on Powell’s doorstep in the two weeks after the speech.
It also sent a chill through Britain’s ethnic-minority population, then only a little more than 1m-strong, which faced a spike of abuse and in some cases violence. Paul Boateng, Britain’s first black cabinet minister, remembers being spat at as a boy and told to go home for the first time by someone in a van as he walked back from school the day after the speech. Powell never recanted and never spoke out against such actions.
Khalid Mahmood, the Labour MP for Birmingham Perry Barr, remembers his father and other Pakistani immigrants who worked in the foundries and engineering workshops of Birmingham worrying that repatriation had been placed so prominently on the national agenda and by such a heavyweight figure.
Powell knew the speech would cause uproar, even though he did not technically depart far from Tory policy, and you can see from television interviews at the time that he revelled in it too. He talked in the speech about the “chorus of execration” he was sure he would provoke and privately predicted that it would go up like a rocket but then “stay up”.
 
A man walks past graffiti reflecting the spasm of racial anxiety in the days after the speech by Enoch Powell
It did just that, marking the arrival of Powellism: a current in British politics that has influenced Thatcherism and the more absolutist varieties of Euroscepticism.
The man to whom he made that prediction was a friend and informal media adviser, Clem Jones, who was editor of the Express &amp; Star, the local paper in Powell’s Wolverhampton constituency. Jones held far more liberal views on race and immigration than Powell and was appalled by the speech. Powell’s two daughters had actually been looked after that evening by the Jones family, and when he came to collect them, he got a frosty reception from Jones’s wife. The two families had no further contact.
The rocket did not come out of nowhere. In the preceding months scenes of racial conflict from America had filled British TV screens, and a fortnight before the speech Martin Luther King had been assassinated. Britain itself had only recently experienced significant non-white immigration, from the Caribbean, Africa and the subcontinent. There was, in effect, an open door to Commonwealth citizens from 1948 to 1962, inspired by a notion of the “imperial family”, and about 500,000 people had, rather to the surprise of the authorities, taken advantage of it.
As opinion turned against it, especially in areas of high immigration such as Powell’s constituency of Wolverhampton South West, the open door became less open, and less than two months before the speech, Jim Callaghan, the Labour home secretary, had made it harder for Kenyan Asians to enter the UK after Africanisation policies prompted them to leave their home country.
Powell’s own history intersected potently with this historical moment. A child of lower-middle-class Birmingham teachers, he was an intense, clever boy who went from King Edward’s School to read classics at Cambridge and on to become the youngest professor in the British empire (in Sydney) at the age of 25. He loved the military and the British Empire with an unusual passion and was stationed in India from 1943 to 1946, where he learnt Urdu and Hindi and dreamt of one day becoming viceroy.
Indian independence was a shattering disappointment. He felt that India was too divided by ethnicity and religion to be ready for self-government and had predicted the bloodshed that followed partition in 1947. But by the early 1950s he had transferred his passion for empire into a passion for a narrower British nationalism. He had a stringent, soldier’s view of national allegiance, as something you had to be ready to die for. Newcomers could blend into the ethnic majority but only through assimilation. The communalism he had witnessed in India convinced him ethnicity was too “thick” just to be wished away in common citizenship.
This was an unfashionable view even in the 1950s and 1960s, and it put him sharply at odds with much of elite opinion, which had embraced the idea of the moral equality of all people as spelt out in the UN’s Universal Declaration of Human Rights and in anti-discrimination legislation pioneered by the Labour home secretary Roy Jenkins in 1965.
As the sociologist Geoff Dench has put it: “Labour was devising a new world role for Britain. Empire imposed on other nations had been wrong. But Britain could still show the world how to foster a peaceful, multicultural and open metropolitan society. A progressive national mission was drafted around a new internal empire that would atone for the old.”
 
Anti-Powell demonstrators in Wolverhampton days before the 1970 election
To Powell this was unbelievably naive. To him the bonds of allegiance had been broken with the end of empire and could not be repaired.
His fierce British nationalism and defence of majorities’ right to favour their own, in Britain and later Northern Ireland, against the rising power of minority-rights legislation found a ready audience among people who felt their voice was not being heard in the corridors of power. And in his speech citing Virgil’s Aeneid, in which he foresaw “the River Tiber foaming with much blood”, he happily amplified and legitimised the prejudices of some of his constituents.
He was acutely aware of how many people felt their welfare reward for war-time sacrifice had been compromised by the arrival of outsiders (even though some black and Asian people had shared in that war sacrifice). The Wolverhampton woman he referred to in the speech, who was allegedly being hounded out by aggressive black neighbours, had, not coincidentally, lost her husband and both sons in the war. (Clem Jones tried and failed to find the woman and believed her to be an invention.)
The speech itself is clearly racist, by even quite a narrow definition, in its language of “wide-grinning piccaninnies” and the sense of an alien threat. Powell always denied being a racist, or rather swung between saying to be human was to be racist (it was a minor sin, like being selfish) and denying any sense of superiority to other races. He said more than once that he believed some of the peoples of India to be superior in intelligence “and other respects” to the average European, and he spoke out against the anti-Mau Mau brutality in Kenya in 1959.
Many of his contemporaries, including Michael Foot, cleared him of the accusation of racism, but racist in those days often meant someone who was personally hostile towards people from other races.
I think it is clear from his blindness to the Indian desire for self-government and his disregard for fair legal treatment of minorities that a sense of white European superiority, maybe cultural rather than racial, prevented him from seeing those claims as of much interest or value.
It is not quite right to say he was just a man of his time; he was clearly rather anachronistic even in the late 1960s and harked back to an Edwardian or even Victorian heyday. Perhaps he embodied the disparagement often directed at the whole country about losing an empire and failing to find a role.
As the rich, liberal democracies were moving to embrace a universal idea of human equality after two world wars, the Holocaust and decolonisation, Powell spoke for the old hierarchies and the “assertive traditionalists” left behind by this new spirit.
The cry “Enoch was right!”, which boomed across the country in 1968 — and helped to swing the 1970 general election — is now just a distant whisper, though still potent enough to cause a Tory candidate, Nigel Hastilow, to be sacked after uttering it back in 2007.
Even another Nigel, Nigel Farage, who admits being a fan in his youth, distances himself. “He clearly lost the centre ground with the violence of his language. Heath was right to sack him. I have been very conscious not to make the same mistake.”
Powell’s predictions about the growth of the ethnic-minority population, which were often ridiculed as alarmist at the time, have turned out to be broadly correct, as Britain has moved from a visible ethnic-minority population of around 1m (2%) in 1968 to more than 8m (13%) today.
His two main political predictions, about white people being humbled by the rise of ethnic-minority power, and the rivers of blood from racial conflict, have proved not just wrong but deranged. There has been some blood — two waves of race riots, in the early 1980s and 2001, around 85 people killed by homegrown Islamic extremists and the couple of hundred (mainly members of ethnic minorities) who have been the victims of murders that had a racial element. But that is a trickle, not a river.
Not everything in the speech was unreasonable. The points Powell made about the pressure on public services could be heard today; likewise his point about some people feeling “strangers in their own country”.
Moreover, while his claim about the impossibility of ethnic integration is too bleak, we have learnt that it is often harder than the breezy liberalism of the 1960s and 1970s assumed. Britain is a much more open society than in 1968 and has a rapidly growing ethnic-minority middle class to show for it (and a fast-growing mixed-race population). But in many south Asian communities there remains little marrying-out and strongly clustered living. Governments of all persuasions rightly worry about how to nudge people out of their corners and into the mainstream.
What were the main consequences of the speech? On immigration itself, policy was already becoming more restrictive, though Powell’s intervention did not stop Heath in 1972 opening the door to about 30,000 Ugandan Asians.
In 1978 Thatcher talked about people’s fear of being “swamped”, and when she became prime minister she quietly made sure numbers came down sharply. The low to negative net immigration in the late 1980s and early 1990s and the loose cross-party consensus around low-ish inflows combined with fair treatment of those here were partly the legacy of popular support for Powell’s speech. The consensus was dramatically broken in 1997 by Labour, which had come to see its progressive identity as strongly connected with higher levels of immigration.
Wolverhampton itself has done its best to prove Powell wrong. For my book The British Dream, about postwar immigration, I spoke to a multi-generational group of mainly Sikh and Hindu Indians a few years ago.
The older generation vividly remembered the bad old days of battles with the National Front but also how the Powell speech created a sense of unity among the town’s ethnic minorities (about 15,000 out of 150,000 in 1968).
Most of the younger generation talked about how the town had been transformed for the better and were more likely to complain about obstacles of caste than of race.
Overall “Rivers of Blood” must count as a setback for the country. Just when a discussion should have been starting about integration, racial justice and distinguishing reasonable complaints from racists ones of the white people whose communities were being transformed (not just by immigration), Powell polarised the argument — The Times decried the speech as “evil” — and had the effect of closing it down. For a generation, concern about immigration came to be regarded as slightly indecent.
Thanks to Powell’s apocalyptic language, it became even harder to think rationally about borders, immigration, race, integration and national identity. Consider the continuing silence or confusion about race in relation to London gang violence and grooming scandals.
There should have been a white paper on ethnic-minority integration in the 1970s and possibly even a new ministry of immigration and integration; instead policy in this area was subcontracted to the young left in local government — many of whom had come into politics specifically to oppose Powell.
His lurid predictions about conflict also ended up setting the bar too low on integration. I met a political activist from Leicester at a conference last year who was saying how well integrated the city was. When I challenged her, pointing out how much different groups lived apart in different parts of town, she replied, “Yes, but we have social peace.” So long as the River Soar was not actually “foaming with much blood”, everything was fine!
A more optimistic image, also from Leicester, made me think about Powell a few months ago. The remains of Richard III were passing through the city in a cortege, and the streets were lined with what seemed to be mainly British Asians throwing white roses (for the House of York) at his coffin. The institution of monarchy reaching back in time to unite us across ethnic boundaries in a common allegiance in the present would have pleased and probably rather puzzled the prophet of racial doom.
Is university for all working? - Standpoint


The helter-skelter expansion of higher education in the past 30 years is probably the single most profound change to British society in my lifetime. Around two-thirds of our current universities have opened in that period as the proportion of young people going to university has increased from 15 to nearly 50 per cent.
Like most big and rapid changes this transition from elite to mass higher education has its blessings and its drawbacks, and it is too soon to discern all the patterns. The switch from an industrial to a knowledge economy and the increase in administrative-analytical roles, and graduate-only occupations, is one obvious cause and consequence of the expansion. Another change is to the school system which has become more overtly focused on directing pupils into full-time academic study while other forms of technical and vocational education both school and post-school have struggled in the face of the university hegemony.
One, unintended, regional policy consequence of expansion has been a revival of several of the great ex-industrial northern cities which are now quasi-university towns.
Less quantifiable are the political and cultural changes. The last election might have been the first in which the “university seats” made a significant difference — now almost 20 per cent of seats have a substantial university-related vote. Also, the growth of the graduate population is closely linked to liberalisation trends. Leaving home and spending several years among people of different backgrounds tends to make you more comfortable with social change and less concerned with loyalty, tradition and group attachment, the values of small-c  conservatism.
This may be a benign outcome for individuals but it has surely contributed to the sharpness of the value divides in society (that I describe in my book The Road to Somewhere), revealed by support for Brexit on the one hand and graduate Britain’s fierce concern with equalities and identity politics on the other. Openness, individual autonomy and internationalism are key values of modern universities and are often viewed with suspicion by ordinary voters.
Indeed, the roots of the Brexit vote can be found in the alienation caused by the “two masses” — mass immigration and mass higher education. The latter in particular has contributed to the declining status, and often pay, of non-graduate employment.
For those who don’t go to university there is also a big psychological difference between 15-20 per cent of your schoolmates going and 50 per cent going. Significantly, this “shadow” cast by the great expansion is one of the few angles that David Willetts’s stimulating book on the modern university does not explore. It may be a case of love is blind. His answer, in any case, is to send 70 or even 80 per cent of the cohort to university, as is the case in Finland, Sweden and South Korea. 
To expand Britain’s version of higher education in that manner surely fails to take account of both the variety of aptitudes in the population and the variety of needs of the modern economy. It is true, of course, that all developed countries have hugely expanded post-school and university education in recent decades. But Britain’s is the most undifferentiated: it has simply expanded the form and ethos of elite higher education.
Consider the ancient spires of Oxford and the University of Bedfordshire, a new university. In both cases it is the relevant university departments that select from the students who have chosen that course, rather than the students selecting the university, as in much of the US and continental Europe. In both cases what is offered is a three-year general academic degree usually focused on analytical skills. The course will be taught by academics who see research as their primary interest. And the students will, in the main, leave home to board at the university (though a smaller proportion at Bedfordshire), again unlike most students in Europe and the US, who go to college in their home town. 
Willetts, Minister for Universities and Science in the Coalition government, sees no problem with the “massification” of elite higher education. Indeed, he regards the residential system and the focus on research as strengths of our system.
Much of the book is a defence of his own recent reforms, including the increase in tuition fees to £9,000 a year and the removal of any limit on the number of students who can go to university. He is particularly persuasive on the former, pointing out that it has broadened participation (20 per cent of people from the poorest backgrounds now go compared with 11 per cent in 2006), brought more funds into universities and saved public money — the balance of public to private funding of higher education has switched from 60/40 to 40/60.
A system of no upfront payment and a non-commercial repayment arrangement after a student starts to earn above £21,000 a year is a creative and broadly fair system though it can be, and possibly will be, adjusted at the margin with the focus on reducing the swingeing interest rate currently charged.
Willetts is less convincing when taking a broader look at the economic and non-economic benefits to both the individual graduate and society from the expansion. Graduates earn more and are more employable. They are also healthier, less likely to commit crime, more trusting and more likely to volunteer and vote.
He cites research that claims this is more than just a selection effect. But surely most of the effect arises from the fact that a large proportion of people that choose to go to university are already bright, affluent and well-behaved. In Germany, where fewer people go to university and more go to other forms of post-school education, are there noticeably fewer such people?
Willetts is a friend of the low-tariff (meaning easier to get into) new universities, many of which were polytechnics until 1992. Universities are way behind schools in measuring “value-added”, but it is probably the case that the lower-status universities are doing more for their students than Russell Group ones which take most of the already well-educated students from private and top state schools.
About 40 per cent of all students are doing vocational courses such as medicine, nursing, pharmacy, law, surveying and business studies, and Willetts is rightly excited by the industry link-ups at places like Aston and Sunderland. He even has a good word to say about media studies courses.
 
David (now Lord) Willetts: Always worth reading, but seems to regard higher education as operating in a vacuum (Chatham House CC BY 2.0)
He is, however, too intellectually honest to make this an entirely convincing love letter to universities. An alternative account of the massification of elite universities, mainly drawn from this very book, would point out the following. Universities do not add much educational value, especially in the smarter universities, because academics are researchers first and teachers second, if at all. They do not do much for social mobility. Indeed, by making university almost a compulsory middle- and upper-middle-class rite of passage in recent decades, expansion may have been a drag on mobility. They suck up too much state research funding, some of which would be better spent in autonomous research institutes like Germany’s Fraunhofer institutes. And they have cast a shadow of failure over half the population and hastened Michael Young’s meritocratic dystopia.
Moreover, the avuncular Willetts has draped his arm around “his” universities and happily turned a blind eye to other obvious problems, such as dumbing down. Not only has there been a 40 per cent increase in the proportion of students getting a first in the past five years — one consequence of turning students into fee-paying consumers? — but there is now essentially no entry requirement at all in some of the new universities.
And how do we know that all this “world-class research” is in fact world-class? In the one corner of the humanities that I know something about — immigration, race, multiculturalism — much of the academic research is barely disguised political advocacy. Education departments are often very ideological too. Willetts complains rather meekly about being unable to give a speech at Cambridge because of a student protest but seems oblivious to the intellectual orthodoxy that dominates across the humanities.
The real problem with Willetts’s qualified cheer-leading for the current configuration of higher education is that he tends to see it as operating in a vacuum. When reflecting on his own bugbear of early subject specialisation at age 16 he understands how elite universities distort the whole educational pyramid. But he seems blind to the impact rapid university expansion has had on the rest of post-school education, almost wiping out sub-degree technical education and eclipsing higher-level vocational education.
All the prestige and financial incentives point in one direction, from the schools that are now judged on how many people they can send to good universities to the universities’ bottomless funding system backed by the Student Loans Company and the simple UCAS portal giving easy access to a national system.
“In post-19 education we are producing vanishingly small numbers of higher-technician-level qualifications, while massively increasing the output of generalist bachelors’ degrees and low-level vocational qualifications,” as Professor Alison Wolf puts it. In 2016, 332,000 people got a first degree and just 6,000 completed a higher technical HND or HNC. No wonder employers complain about skill shortages and hire people from abroad.
The adult skills budget, covering all non-university post-school education, has been in free-fall. Further education colleges which were once closely connected to local employers now do mainly remedial class-room teaching for 16-18 year olds or multipurpose community provision such as English teaching for immigrants.
University expansion has almost certainly diverted students away from STEM  (science, technology, engineering and matthematics) and technical courses, that prior to 1992 they would have done at one of the 35 polytechnics, into business, arts and social science degrees.
And the claims for the economic success of the elite university model do not stack up. One-third of recent graduates are in non-graduate jobs. The graduate premium in pay is falling, and in any case only tells you about a differential, not absolute incomes. Willetts’s claims that graduates are good for productivity and exports ring hollow given Britain’s weaknesses in both those areas. It turns out that just creating lots of graduates doing the courses they fancy at age 18 does not magically produce a high-productivity economy.
Of course, every parent wants their child to go to university: it signifies security and joining the middle class. And vocational education will never compete with the high road of A levels and a prestigious academic course at a university where you will mingle with the next generation of managers and professionals.
But the British growth model of easy hire and fire plus high labour market participation (and high immigration) and generalist academic training for as many as possible, is a lop-sided one both socially and economically. A degree is a signalling device to employers, but 40 per cent of all new workers have studied an irrelevant subject and an increasing proportion of graduates have poor basic skills.
For all the rigidity of the company-based vocational training system (typical in the Germanic world) it helps to motivate the bottom 50 per cent in the schooling system because the better they do the better the apprenticeship scheme they can join. In Britain, by contrast, if you don’t make the cut to do A levels, which is usually pretty clear by age 13 or 14, the system has little to offer.
When an adviser to the Thatcher governments of the early 1980s, Willetts himself was instrumental in destroying the old craft-based, union-dominated apprenticeship system. But none of the mainly state-funded replacements has ever really worked and the status gulf between vocational and academic has widened. It is not clear that the new initiative of T-levels at schools (will any of the bright kids do them?) and an apprenticeship levy will change anything.
We often congratulate ourselves on having become a less class-bound society in recent decades, and there is some truth in that, but the debate about post-school education remains haunted by class guilt and accusations of snobbery.
Willetts, and others who have shaped policy, are so keen not to kick away the ladder and deny others some version of their own experience — grammar school and Oxford PPE for Willetts — that they commit the equal and opposite sin of saying that their experience, or an inferior version of it, should be good for almost everyone.
The result is a cluster of institutions that proudly bear the title of university, yet are condemned to permanent second-class status compared with the “world-class research” universities. Many of them do important work, much of it vocational, including degree apprenticeships. Willetts tells us to admire the great variety of universities with varying missions. But why compete in a league where you are judged by standards you will never excel in — in terms of research quality or graduate pay — when you could be in one that judges you for what you actually do?
Yet any suggestion that the new universities should be called something else to capture those different missions usually attracts howls of anger. More mildly, John Raftery, Vice-Chancellor of London Metropolitan University, describes the problem as how to avoid “tearing off the epaulettes”.
But this is not about titles — it is about what institutions do. And it is clear that we have a gaping hole between research-led, academic universities and FE colleges. A British version of the German Fachhochscule or the American community colleges is needed to fill the big intermediate skills gap. They should be able to offer two-year courses with a practical rather than academic focus, run by teachers not academics. If students on sub-degree technical courses develop a more academic aptitude they should be able to switch to a full degree course in the same or a different institution.
To sidestep the status-ridden debate about titles we could just call all institutions providing any kind of post-school education a university or a college, and all, including FE colleges, could perhaps come under the umbrella of a fully-fledged university.
Willetts is always worth reading and this book is full of wise and witty observations (my favourite is that many Americans thought that the 1944 Butler Education Act was for training butlers) and challenges to conventional thinking on, for example, the focusing of education spending on the early years. But here he is too bent on self-justification and over-eagerly attributes many desirable trends that would have happened anyway to university expansion. Of course, our great universities are a national asset that, despite hand-wringing about visa-restrictions and counting students as immigrants, attract a rising number of international students (though internationalisation can go too far).
Yet expansion has amplified value divides, weakened our middling skill base and probably done little for what Christopher Lasch called “the general competence of society” (about 20 per cent of pupils still leave school more or less illiterate and innumerate). People in the bottom half of society do not need “rescuing” by spending three years at a new university. They need a better basic academic school education than most of them are getting now, and then a choice of good non-academic vocational/technical education or a university. (Ideally both would offer a residential and stay-at-home option.)
Mass higher education has reinforced the general trend towards elevating cognitive ability as the gold standard of human esteem. The trend may be correcting itself as dissatisfaction with some of the lower-status universities grows. Men who graduated from the 23 lowest-performing British universities went on to earn less than those who did not go at all, according to Barnaby Lenon’s forthcoming book Other People’s Children.
Moreover, the combination of AI replacing a range of middling cognitive jobs, an ageing society, and a reduction in immigration after Brexit, might force us to place more value again on many essential caring and manual/technical occupations.
Over-expansion of the university sector has damaged the status balance in society. Willetts is right that three years away at university discovering oneself and the world can be a positive life-changing experience (it was for me) but it isn’t for everyone and it is not the only route to a happy and achieved life or a thriving economy.
Take that back: In Brexit chaos, England takes on its critics
To see yourself as others see you is one of the virtues that is hard to achieve but always worth striving for. You do not have to agree with the account that the others give, but it is usually useful to know what it is. Brexit has, at least in that sense, been a worthwhile exercise, providing the "others" with an extended opportunity to say what they think of the British and Britain.
I have had an especially bracing experience of the boot being on the other foot listening in to Germany's Brexit debate. I was a reporter in Germany at the time of reunification and took part in many superficial dissections of the German soul. Now it is my soul's turn.
Reading the Irish writer Fintan O'Toole's critique of Brexit has conjured up similar feelings. O'Toole, a biographer, literary critic and Irish Times columnist, is one of the most influential Brexit critics in the liberal press in Ireland, Britain and the US.
 
The British, especially the English, have always found the EU more difficult to adapt to than most other Europeans.  Jason Alden
The great Anglo-Irish asymmetry, that Ireland knows Britain so much better than vice versa, makes O'Toole a potentially ideal insider-outsider observer of British affairs. Moreover, although at times in the Brexit saga both the British and Irish seem to have retreated into familiar historic roles – the former showing casual obliviousness to Irish interests, the latter quick to assume the worst motives behind every British move – O'Toole himself is not an 800-years-of-hurt Irish nationalist and is both a long-standing opponent of Sinn Féin and scourge of Dublin political corruption. He is also a fluent writer and his most recent book, Heroic Failure: Brexit and the Politics of Pain, is full of acute cultural observation and includes a hilarious take-down of Boris Johnson.
But there is so much I do not recognise in his account that he has forced me, a Remain voter who thinks the Brexit vote should be respected, to reflect on some of the dilemmas that Brexit has brought to the surface: above all, the English question.
As England becomes a more normal nation, thanks in part to the devolution all around it, and starts to see itself as having a distinct identity and interest, the spectre of English nostalgia for empire is raised by O'Toole and other Brexit critics such as David Olusoga, Anthony Barnett, Afua Hirsch and Pankaj Mishra.
National identity
In his latest book and numerous columns, O'Toole graciously concedes that England is allowed a national identity but then implies that expressing it to the disadvantage of the smaller countries in its orbit is prohibited. Ireland can act in its own interests even if those conflict with England's interests – Second World War neutrality, for example, or more recently by adopting an ultra-low corporate tax policy – but England, because of its size and history of colonial oppression, is not allowed to do the same.
O'Toole's Brexit is a collage of English ugliness, driven by racism, insularity, self-pity, superiority, and obsession with empire and Germany, led by a dilettantish political elite whose project is an anti-welfare state form of extreme globalisation cunningly disguised as a popular revolt against globalisation. But this is a Viz magazine version of Brexit for lefties and much of it, based on his reading of films and novels, is too flippant to be contested.
O'Toole, like many on the liberal left, is most comfortable with economic motivations and seems not to accept that reasonable people can value sovereignty and strong national attachments. The phrase "national democratic accountability" does not feature in the book, nor does the idea that the EU is now an utterly different institution from the one that Britain and Ireland joined in 1973, with a far deeper penetration into the rules of everyday life, from free movement to waste disposal.
 
A Leave Means Leave demonstrator outside the Houses of Parliament. English identity is more tied up in political institutions and ideas of self-government than in culture, language and way of life, as is more the case on the continent. Simon Dawson
Apart from a swerve at the end of the book, the EU is seen as entirely benign and criticism of its "imaginary oppression" largely Tory fantasy. He seems barely to register the miserable euro story and what happened to Greece and Italy (and to a smaller extent Ireland itself), or the foreign policy failures, from Bosnia to Ukraine, or the way in which core countries break the rules on deficits or refugees with impunity.
None of this amounts to a clear case for leaving the EU, but the idea that strong objections to its evolution, especially since 1992, are a post-imperial, upper-class English fantasy is itself a Dublin fantasy. This is more a Gavin and Stacey Brexit than it is a Horse & Hound one.
His knowledge of Britain is similarly reliant on clichés. Margaret Thatcher did not destroy the welfare state: welfare spending in real terms grew significantly between 1979 and 1997, and is higher than in Ireland. Post-2010 austerity has halted the rise.
His Lord Snooty view of the Tory party is also out of date. The party is now more representative of the broad middle class than it has ever been. Less than half of Tory MPs are privately educated, as are only one third of Theresa May's (Etonian-free) cabinet.
 
An anti-Brexit demonstrator stands under a European Union umbrella.  LUKE MACGREGOR
?Decline in most prejudices
O'Toole repeats the canards of Britain becoming a less tolerant country, and of racism not diminishing but merely going underground. Yet the Britain of Danny Boyle's Olympic opening ceremony of 2012 has not vanished: attitude surveys show a continuing decline in most prejudices in recent years. And while reported hate crime has been rising – arguably because of greater official encouragement to report – the Crime Survey for England and Wales, which is based on face-to-face interviews and covers unreported incidents, finds that hate crime has continued on a downward trend notwithstanding a brief spike after the Brexit vote. (A recent EU report ranked Ireland second worst in the EU for violence towards black people and Britain second best.)
O'Toole's account of English nationalism is largely drawn from some of its most strident advocates. It is like judging ordinary Irish national feeling by reference to the Sinn Féin official I heard a few years ago romantically lauding the "beautiful, untutored, spontaneous spirit of the Irish nation".
Yet top prize for historical anachronism must go to O'Toole's claim that "opposition to Irish independence … is utterly constitutive of modern British conservatism". It is as if he went to sleep at the time of Edward Carson. Is he not aware that the foundations of the Good Friday Agreement were crafted by John Major's Tory government?
There are, it is true, some hardcore unionists who were never fully reconciled to the Good Friday Agreement (it was not signed by the DUP, nor Sinn Féin) and they have a few friends in the Tory party, most of whom are strong Brexiteers. But conservatism (of both big and small "c" varieties) in England has not stood apart from the transformation in Anglo-Irish relations since the 1980s.
 
Despite the current tensions, with the Irish border apparently standing in the way of a smoother British exit, anti-Irish sentiments are rarely expressed. David Rowe
It is a familiar tale. When I was much younger Ireland was seen as a poor, backward place and jokes about stupid Irish people were common. Seldom has a stereotype about a neighbouring people changed so rapidly and dramatically. Ireland now has higher per capita income than Britain and is far more independent of it. Yet are there two sovereign states in the world that are more culturally and personally entwined? And despite the current tensions, with the Irish border apparently standing in the way of a smoother British exit, how often have you heard anti-Irish sentiments expressed?
To my knowledge nobody in Britain has proposed using as a negotiating lever the future of the Common Travel Area between the two countries after Brexit, nor the special status of Irish people in Britain, who are treated as if they are British citizens (with more rights than other EU citizens). This arrangement works both ways but is more advantageous to the Irish.
Little commitment to empire
Surely if the English were so nostalgic for empire, and Ireland's place in it, there would have been much more anti-Irish bluster over recent months. In fact, what is remarkable about 20th-century British history is how little resistance in Britain there was to decolonisation in general after 1945. If British people today feel a vague pride in empire, it is, like Italians and the Roman Empire, a pride in ancestors that does not extend to endorsing their brutal methods.
In its 19th-century heyday the empire did at times have popular support, but it only directly impinged on a small fraction of the British population and was never above criticism. In any case, the end of empire left less of a mark than in many other parts of Europe, notably France and Portugal. It also left far less of a mark on the Tory party than subsequent arguments about Europe. After the 1950s there were a few empire diehards in the Monday Club and among those representing white settlers in southern Africa but, as Jeremy Black argues in his book The British Empire: A History and a Debate, most key players in the Tory party in the 1960s, such as Edward Heath and Reginald Maudling, felt little commitment to empire.
 
England is an unusually fluid, open and diverse country. Its culture and establishment is highly porous, especially in relation to the Anglosphere (a Canadian runs the Bank of England bank, an Irishman captains the limited-overs cricket team, Scots have dominated Labour). Jason Alden
Today's idea of global Britain may be unrealistic, but it is about autonomy and escape, not bossing around Kipling's "lesser breeds". The one major museum dedicated to the history of empire closed in 2009 and the Commonwealth Institute was sold off in 2007. If empire nostalgia played rather little role in the 1975 European referendum, why should it suddenly emerge in 2016?
The answer, according to O'Toole, is that as Ireland has advanced towards a complex multilayered nationalism, England has retreated into a simplistic, mythological one. Really? Surely a large part of the Anglo-Irish rapprochement of recent decades has been based on Ireland becoming a modern, liberal, urban country that is much more like England, complete with legal abortion, gay marriage and a growing ethnic minority population.
England is an unusually fluid, open and diverse country – around 23 per cent of its population is not white British, much of its economy and infrastructure is foreign-owned, and its culture and establishment is highly porous, especially in relation to the Anglosphere (a Canadian runs the central bank, an Irishman captains the limited-overs cricket team, Scots have dominated Labour). There is more social mobility than most people realise and a fast-growing ethnic minority middle class.
Not everyone finds this degree of openness and change comfortable and those reservations get a proper hearing in our undeferential democracy. They also inform some of the recent rise in English national identification – and the Brexit vote.
?Embarrassing ignorance
O'Toole complains that the self-absorbed English did not think about the Irish border in the referendum campaign and he is surely right that the subsequent arguments have eroded some of the trust and affection built up between our two political classes.
Even allowing for the impossible task that voters handed them, it is also true that Westminster politicians have not covered themselves in glory on Brexit: triggering Article 50 before agreeing a plan, failing to prepare public opinion for necessary trade-offs, allowing the EU to set the agenda and sequencing of negotiations, and exhibiting, in some cases, embarrassing ignorance about key issues.
But it is unfair to heap all the opprobrium for this on the "decadent British ruling class". Given the historic sensitivities involved, and the consensus on avoiding a hard border, the EU might have been expected to ask the UK and Ireland to come to a mutually agreeable deal between themselves within the constraints of what an external EU border requires. Instead Dublin and Brussels appeared to turn the screw. There is plenty of Brexiteer anger and frustration about this, and more to come, but very little has been directed at Ireland.
So as England gradually emerges from its historic envelopment in Britain, how can it express a national interest without selfishly damaging the interests of the smaller nations around it? Divergence of values and interests within these islands is actually small and rare, but England wanting to leave the EU against the wishes of the smaller nations, apart from Wales, presents just such a dilemma and a future challenge to the continuing political union with both Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Yet in the post-devolution, post-Good Friday Agreement politics of these islands, England is the only country not invited to reimagine itself. The Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales have new institutions and new moods. Englishness has no new institutions (beyond metro mayors), precious little official recognition and is mainly shunned by the political class and intelligentsia, which lends the idea of Englishness a reactive and truculent tone.
The rise in English identification in recent years is primarily, but not solely, a reaction to devolution. And, contrary to the claims of a surge in a disaffected, nativist Englishness, the best indicators – including the British Social Attitudes Survey and a BBC and YouGov poll – show England-only identification at less than 20 per cent, far below Scotland-only identity. A majority of Brexit voters are England identifiers but more than 80 per of people in England also retain an attachment to Britishness.
John Denham, of the Centre for English Identity and Politics at Winchester University, identifies a core "English interest" group that supports an English parliament, rejects the Barnett formula – used by the Treasury to allocate public spending – and prioritises English interests over both the union and the EU. It is most strongly present in poorer and non-metropolitan places but it does not speak for all of the 53 per cent of English voters who backed Brexit, let alone the 47 per cent who didn't.
Aside from grumbling over subsidies for the Celts, most English people have remained sanguine about Britain's asymmetrical devolution. After all, as Vernon Bogdanor points out in his new book Beyond Brexit, if you account for 85 per cent of a population, you can bear quite a lot of asymmetry. By the same token a federal system in the UK is not practical when one unit is so dominant; the closest equivalent is Canada, where Ontario has 39 per cent of the population.
So instead of rejecting the devolution settlement, a politically mute Englishness has found expression in opposition to loss of sovereignty to the EU. The British, especially the English, have always found the EU more difficult to adapt to than most other Europeans. This is not because of arrogance but because of our unbroken political-legal traditions and the fact that English identity is more tied up in political institutions and ideas of self-government than in culture, language and way of life, as is more the case on the continent.
Bigger forces
Technocratic and unaccountable decision-making faces greater hostility in England than most other EU polities, especially those smaller countries, such as Ireland, that have always had to adapt to bigger forces.
The Brexit crisis is also a crisis for and of devolution. It is not only about the technicalities of how powers are repatriated from Brussels but about how to accommodate a more distinctive and assertive English voice – even just a 53 per cent English voice – in the politics of these islands, without creating an equal and opposite reaction from the smaller nations.
In recent articles Fintan O'Toole has quoted shocking data from the Future of England survey, suggesting that 83 per cent of Leave voters think that the "unravelling of the peace process in Northern Ireland" is a "price worth paying" for a Brexit that allows them to "take back control". This shows how "other" Northern Ireland has become to many English people, but also how sentiment can sour when ignored.
However, one should not exaggerate English militancy. Who doubts that if the Brexit vote had seen a small English majority for leaving overturned by slightly larger majorities for staying in the rest of the UK, the English would have shrugged and accepted the result?
Some Brexiteers do talk warmly about the Anglosphere and many have a vision of launching out on to the high seas. This may imply a naive concept of sovereignty in today's world but, contrary to the imperial nostalgia narrative, it is a fantasy of freedom not a yearning to dominate again.
It is understandable that people with roots in former colonies are fearful of a reawakened imperial lion, but they are grappling with ghosts and their splenetic caricatures do not help us understand the new dilemmas created when those "people of England, that never have spoken yet" do find their political voice.
Looking for the soul of England
 
To see yourself as others see you is one of the virtues that is hard to achieve but always worth striving for. You do not have to agree with the account that the others give, but it is usually useful to know what it is. Brexit has, at least in that sense, been a worthwhile exercise, providing the “others” with an extended opportunity to say what they think of the British and Britain.
I have had an especially bracing experience of the boot being on the other foot listening in to Germany’s Brexit debate. I was a reporter in Germany at the time of reunification and took part in many superficial dissections of the German soul. Now it is my soul’s turn.
Reading the Irish writer Fintan O’Toole’s critique of Brexit has conjured up similar feelings. O’Toole, a biographer, literary critic and Irish Times columnist, is one of the most influential Brexit critics in the liberal press in Ireland, Britain and the US.
The great Anglo-Irish asymmetry, that Ireland knows Britain so much better than vice versa, makes O’Toole a potentially ideal insider-outsider observer of British affairs. Moreover, although at times in the Brexit saga both the British and Irish seem to have retreated into familiar historic roles – the former showing casual obliviousness to Irish interests, the latter quick to assume the worst motives behind every British move – O’Toole himself is not an 800-years-of-hurt Irish nationalist and is both a long-standing opponent of Sinn Féin and scourge of Dublin political corruption. He is also a fluent writer and his most recent book, Heroic Failure: Brexit and the Politics of Pain, is full of acute cultural observation and includes a hilarious take-down of Boris Johnson.
But there is so much I do not recognise in his account that he has forced me, a Remain voter who thinks the Brexit vote should be respected, to reflect on some of the dilemmas that Brexit has brought to the surface: above all, the English question.
As England becomes a more normal nation, thanks in part to the devolution all around it, and starts to see itself as having a distinct identity and interest, the spectre of English nostalgia for empire is raised by O’Toole and other Brexit critics such as David Olusoga, Anthony Barnett, Afua Hirsch and Pankaj Mishra.
In his latest book and numerous columns, O’Toole graciously concedes that England is allowed a national identity but then implies that expressing it to the disadvantage of the smaller countries in its orbit is prohibited. Ireland can act in its own interests even if those conflict with England’s interests – Second World War neutrality, for example, or more recently by adopting an ultra-low corporate tax policy – but England, because of its size and history of colonial oppression, is not allowed to do the same.
O’Toole’s Brexit is a collage of English ugliness, driven by racism, insularity, self-pity, superiority, and obsession with empire and Germany, led by a dilettantish political elite whose project is an anti-welfare state form of extreme globalisation cunningly disguised as a popular revolt against globalisation. But this is a Viz magazine version of Brexit for lefties and much of it, based on his reading of films and novels, is too flippant to be contested.
O’Toole, like many on the liberal left, is most comfortable with economic motivations and seems not to accept that reasonable people can value sovereignty and strong national attachments. The phrase “national democratic accountability” does not feature in the book, nor does the idea that the EU is now an utterly different institution from the one that Britain and Ireland joined in 1973, with a far deeper penetration into the rules of everyday life, from free movement to waste disposal.
Apart from a swerve at the end of the book, the EU is seen as entirely benign and criticism of its “imaginary oppression” largely Tory fantasy. He seems barely to register the miserable euro story and what happened to Greece and Italy (and to a smaller extent Ireland itself), or the foreign policy failures, from Bosnia to Ukraine, or the way in which core countries break the rules on deficits or refugees with impunity.
None of this amounts to a clear case for leaving the EU, but the idea that strong objections to its evolution, especially since 1992, are a post-imperial, upper-class English fantasy is itself a Dublin fantasy. This is more a Gavin and Stacey Brexit than it is a Horse & Hound one.
His knowledge of Britain is similarly reliant on clichés. Margaret Thatcher did not destroy the welfare state: welfare spending in real terms grew significantly between 1979 and 1997, and is higher than in Ireland. Post-2010 austerity has halted the rise.
His Lord Snooty view of the Tory party is also out of date. The party is now more representative of the broad middle class than it has ever been. Less than half of Tory MPs are privately educated, as are only one third of Theresa May’s (Etonian-free) cabinet.
O’Toole repeats the canards of Britain becoming a less tolerant country, and of racism not diminishing but merely going underground. Yet the Britain of Danny Boyle’s Olympic opening ceremony of 2012 has not vanished: attitude surveys show a continuing decline in most prejudices in recent years. And while reported hate crime has been rising – arguably because of greater official encouragement to report – the Crime Survey for England and Wales, which is based on face-to-face interviews and covers unreported incidents, finds that hate crime has continued on a downward trend notwithstanding a brief spike after the Brexit vote. (A recent EU report ranked Ireland second worst in the EU for violence towards black people and Britain second best.)
O’Toole’s account of English nationalism is largely drawn from some of its most strident advocates. It is like judging ordinary Irish national feeling by reference to the Sinn Féin official I heard a few years ago romantically lauding the “beautiful, untutored, spontaneous spirit of the Irish nation”.
Yet top prize for historical anachronism must go to O’Toole’s claim that “opposition to Irish independence… is utterly constitutive of modern British conservatism”. It is as if he went to sleep at the time of Edward Carson. Is he not aware that the foundations of the Good Friday Agreement were crafted by John Major’s Tory government?
There are, it is true, some hardcore unionists who were never fully reconciled to the Good Friday Agreement (it was not signed by the DUP, nor Sinn Féin) and they have a few friends in the Tory party, most of whom are strong Brexiteers. But conservatism (of both big and small “c” varieties) in England has not stood apart from the transformation in Anglo-Irish relations since the 1980s.
It is a familiar tale. When I was much younger Ireland was seen as a poor, backward place and jokes about stupid Irish people were common. Seldom has a stereotype about a neighbouring people changed so rapidly and dramatically. Ireland now has higher per capita income than Britain and is far more independent of it. Yet are there two sovereign states in the world that are more culturally and personally entwined? And despite the current tensions, with the Irish border apparently standing in the way of a smoother British exit, how often have you heard anti-Irish sentiments expressed?
To my knowledge nobody in Britain has proposed using as a negotiating lever the future of the Common Travel Area between the two countries after Brexit, nor the special status of Irish people in Britain, who are treated as if they are British citizens (with more rights than other EU citizens). This arrangement works both ways but is more advantageous to the Irish.
Surely if the English were so nostalgic for empire, and Ireland’s place in it, there would have been much more anti-Irish bluster over recent months. In fact, what is remarkable about 20th century British history is how little resistance in Britain there was to decolonisation in general after 1945. If British people today feel a vague pride in empire, it is, like Italians and the Roman Empire, a pride in ancestors that does not extend to endorsing their brutal methods.
In its 19th century heyday the empire did at times have popular support, but it only directly impinged on a small fraction of the British population and was never above criticism. In any case, the end of empire left less of a mark than in many other parts of Europe, notably France and Portugal. It also left far less of a mark on the Tory party than subsequent arguments about Europe. After the 1950s there were a few empire diehards in the Monday Club and among those representing white settlers in southern Africa but, as Jeremy Black argues in his book The British Empire: A History and a Debate, most key players in the Tory party in the 1960s, such as Edward Heath and Reginald Maudling, felt little commitment to empire.
Today’s idea of global Britain may be unrealistic, but it is about autonomy and escape, not bossing around Kipling’s “lesser breeds”. The one major museum dedicated to the history of empire closed in 2009 and the Commonwealth Institute was sold off in 2007. If empire nostalgia played rather little role in the 1975 European referendum, why should it suddenly emerge in 2016?
The answer, according to O’Toole, is that as Ireland has advanced towards a complex multilayered nationalism, England has retreated into a simplistic, mythological one. Really? Surely a large part of the Anglo-Irish rapprochement of recent decades has been based on Ireland becoming a modern, liberal, urban country that is much more like England, complete with legal abortion, gay marriage and a growing ethnic minority population.
England is an unusually fluid, open and diverse country – around 23 per cent of its population is not white British, much of its economy and infrastructure is foreign-owned, and its culture and establishment is highly porous, especially in relation to the Anglosphere (a Canadian runs the central bank, an Irishman captains the limited-0vers cricket team, Scots have dominated Labour). There is more social mobility than most people realise and a fast-growing ethnic minority middle class.
Not everyone finds this degree of openness and change comfortable and those reservations get a proper hearing in our undeferential democracy. They also inform some of the recent rise in English national identification – and the Brexit vote.
O’Toole complains that the self-absorbed English did not think about the Irish border in the referendum campaign and he is surely right that the subsequent arguments have eroded some of the trust and affection built up between our two political classes.
Even allowing for the impossible task that voters handed them, it is also true that Westminster politicians have not covered themselves in glory on Brexit: triggering Article 50 before agreeing a plan, failing to prepare public opinion for necessary trade-offs, allowing the EU to set the agenda and sequencing of negotiations, and exhibiting, in some cases, embarrassing ignorance about key issues.
But it is unfair to heap all the opprobrium for this on the “decadent British ruling class”. Given the historic sensitivities involved, and the consensus on avoiding a hard border, the EU might have been expected to ask the UK and Ireland to come to a mutually agreeable deal between themselves within the constraints of what an external EU border requires. Instead Dublin and Brussels appeared to turn the screw. There is plenty of Brexiteer anger and frustration about this, and more to come, but very little has been directed at Ireland.
****
So as England gradually emerges from its historic envelopment in Britain, how can it express a national interest without selfishly damaging the interests of the smaller nations around it? Divergence of values and interests within these islands is actually small and rare, but England wanting to leave the EU against the wishes of the smaller nations, apart from Wales, presents just such a dilemma and a future challenge to the continuing political union with both Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Yet in the post-devolution, post-Good Friday Agreement politics of these islands, England is the only country not invited to reimagine itself. The Republic of Ireland, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales have new institutions and new moods. Englishness has no new institutions (beyond metro mayors), precious little official recognition and is mainly shunned by the political class and intelligentsia, which lends the idea of Englishness a reactive and truculent tone.
The rise in English identification in recent years is primarily, but not solely, a reaction to devolution. And, contrary to the claims of a surge in a disaffected, nativist Englishness, the best indicators – including the British Social Attitudes Survey and a BBC and YouGov poll – show England-only identification at less than 20 per cent, far below Scotland-only identity. A majority of Brexit voters are England identifiers but more than 80 per of people in England also retain an attachment to Britishness.
John Denham, of the Centre for English Identity and Politics at Winchester University, identifies a core “English interest” group that supports an English parliament, rejects the Barnett formula – used by the Treasury to allocate public spending – and prioritises English interests over both the union and the EU. It is most strongly present in poorer and non-metropolitan places but it does not speak for all of the 53 per cent of English voters who backed Brexit, let alone the 47 per cent who didn’t.
Aside from grumbling over subsidies for the Celts, most English people have remained sanguine about Britain’s asymmetrical devolution. After all, as Vernon Bogdanor points out in his new book Beyond Brexit, if you account for 85 per cent of a population, you can bear quite a lot of asymmetry. By the same token a federal system in the UK is not practical when one unit is so dominant; the closest equivalent is Canada, where Ontario has 39 per cent of the population.
So instead of rejecting the devolution settlement, a politically mute Englishness has found expression in opposition to loss of sovereignty to the EU. The British, especially the English, have always found the EU more difficult to adapt to than most other Europeans. This is not because of arrogance but because of our unbroken political-legal traditions and the fact that English identity is more tied up in political institutions and ideas of self-government than in culture, language and way of life, as is more the case on the continent.
Technocratic and unaccountable decision-making faces greater hostility in England than most other EU polities, especially those smaller countries, such as Ireland, that have always had to adapt to bigger forces.
The Brexit crisis is also a crisis for and of devolution. It is not only about the technicalities of how powers are repatriated from Brussels but about how to accommodate a more distinctive and assertive English voice – even just a 53 per cent English voice – in the politics of these islands, without creating an equal and opposite reaction from the smaller nations.
In recent articles Fintan O’Toole has quoted shocking data from the Future of England survey, suggesting that 83 per cent of Leave voters think that the “unravelling of the peace process in Northern Ireland” is a “price worth paying” for a Brexit that allows them to “take back control”. This shows how “other” Northern Ireland has become to many English people, but also how sentiment can sour when ignored.
However, one should not exaggerate English militancy. Who doubts that if the Brexit vote had seen a small English majority for leaving overturned by slightly larger majorities for staying in the rest of the UK, the English would have shrugged and accepted the result?
Some Brexiteers do talk warmly about the Anglosphere and many have a vision of launching out on to the high seas. This may imply a naive concept of sovereignty in today’s world but, contrary to the imperial nostalgia narrative, it is a fantasy of freedom not a yearning to dominate again.
It is understandable that people with roots in former colonies are fearful of a reawakened imperial lion, but they are grappling with ghosts and their splenetic caricatures do not help us understand the new dilemmas created when those “people of England, that never have spoken yet” do find their political voice. 
Review: The Human Tide: How Population Shaped the Modern World by Paul Morland — 11 billion reasons why population size matters
The idea of history having a “motor” ceased to be fashionable after the fall of Marxism. After reading The Human Tide it is tempting to want to replace the rusty, broken-down motor of the class struggle with a shiny new turbo-charged machine called demography.
Paul Morland is too subtle a writer to claim that demography is destiny. However, over 300 closely argued pages he more or less persuades us that it is — that most significant events since 1800, from the Industrial Revolution, via the First World War to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the eruption of the Arab Spring, have the growth, shrinkage or movement of populations at their heart.
This speed of demographic change is one of the defining features of modernity. In 1798 Thomas Malthus in An Essay on the Principle of Population described the historic constraint on population growth; any boom in humans would always outstrip the ability of the land to support them and famine and disease would prune numbers back again. However, his book was published at the moment that, under his nose in England, that brake was disappearing.
Thanks to the agricultural and industrial revolutions humanity broke free of Malthusian constraints and entered the so-called demographic transition, which allowed population to stabilise at a higher level. The global population increased from about one billion in 1700 to seven billion today; numbers will probably peak at 11 billion at the end of this century.
The transition consists of the movement from high birth rates and high death rates (including high infant mortality), which was the steady state for most of human history, to high birth rates, falling death rates and reduced infant mortality. Improved sanitation, health care and diet created the great modern population surges. The final stage is combining those lower death rates with the low birth rates associated with greater wealth and female choice (and safe birth control).
“The British Isles is where the demographic revolution began,” Morland argues. A fourfold increase in population during the 19th century was not only a necessary condition of industrialisation, but also fuelled the massive “Anglo-Saxon” emigrations. About six million people left Britain and Ireland in the second half of the 19th century. (Not all the British Isles enjoyed population growth. Ireland’s population, thanks to the famine, halved to four million between 1837 and 1901; its population, Morland says, “fell from nearly a third to less than a tenth of the whole population of the British Isles”.)
A similar demographic trend soon spread to the rest of Europe and Russia, although without the benefit of creating sister societies such as those of the Anglosphere — America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand — that proved so decisive in tilting the balance against Germany in two world wars.
The transition has now spread to most other parts of the world with dramatic and rapid declines in fertility. “The medal for falling fertility,” Morland says, “belongs to Iran, where the rate of childbearing was brought down from well over six in the early years of the Islamic revolution to under two just twenty years later.” Only sub-Saharan Africa is still in the surge phase of the transition, with death rates falling, but birth rates still high. Nigerian women, for instance, still have an average of six children.
This will lead by 2100 to what one might call the great black-white reversal. At the height of their demographic (and political) power in the middle of the 20th century, white Europeans or their descendants elsewhere represented almost 30 per cent of global population. By the end of this century they will account for only 10 per cent, while sub-Saharan Africans will have increased from just 10 per cent in 1950 to more than 25 per cent.
There have been several twists and turns on the broader demographic journey including the unexpected “baby boom” rise in fertility in the immediate postwar period and now the “second transition”, which started in the Catholic (and Orthodox) countries of southern Europe. The “second transition” is a birth rate below replacement level, the result of modern attitudes to female aspiration with traditional hostility to birth outside marriage. In Denmark 45 per cent of births were out of marriage, compared with 12 per cent in Spain and 4 per cent in Greece; in the last two countries, fertility rates are about half a child less than in Denmark.
Morland’s real skill is linking economic, political, military and cultural trends to this demographic story. Power has always resided in numbers on the battlefield or in market size, but also in soft power; Bollywood attracts more global attention than Albanian cinema because of the numbers behind it. And younger societies in the surge phase of the transition are more violent and unstable. This is evident in the history of Europe in the first part of the 20th century and in the Middle East today.
The slaughtering of human beings, however, makes a surprisingly small dent on the human tide when in full flow. Life expectancy in Russia rose from 32 to 67 between 1910 and 1950 in a time of war, famine and terror. (The main exceptions to this rule are the Jews, whose population has not yet recovered from the Holocaust, and the Irish in Ireland, who have not yet recovered to levels from before the famine.)
The book is not always an easy read, but is lucid, jargon-free and full of neat observations. More than half of Britain’s population lived in towns or cities in 1850, while this did not happen in France until 1950 — how much Anglo-French difference can be explained by that? More depressingly, more than 30,000 elderly Japanese die alone every year and an industry has grown up around removal and fumigation when a body is found months after death.
Morland is broadly optimistic and argues that if women are free to control their fertility, outcomes are usually benign, making the sort of forced birth control practised in China and to a lesser extent India unnecessary. The future, he concludes, is grey (a big problem only for societies that grow old before they grow rich), green (as global population declines, humans will need less land and fewer resources) and much less white (because of more rapid growth of non-European populations and immigration into majority white countries).
I wanted more on Nigeria, whose population is set to rise to 800 million by the end of the century (up from 200 million today); it is extraordinary, but Nigerians in the space of 150 years will have gone from 1.5 per cent of the world’s population to 7 per cent. I could also have read more on whether Sri Lanka’s “goldilocks” balance is more widely achievable. “Sri Lanka has become a model of demography if the ideal is a steady state,” Morland says. “Its fertility rate has been hovering a little over two for the best part of thirty years, making it . . . not too hot and not too cold, not too fast and not too slow.” Despite those quibbles, The Human Tide is an admirable introduction to a vital subject.
Trump and Brexit: How Cognitive Elitism Caused Nations to Divide
 
  is the founding editor of Prospect magazine and one of the most distinctive voices on modern British politics. He is currently head of the Demography, Immigration and Integration Unit at the think tank Policy Exchange, and was previously director of the centre-left think tank Demos. His last book The British Dream: Successes and Failures of Post-War Immigration (2013) was runner-up for the Orwell Prize in 2014 and was a finalist for ‘Political Book of the Year’ in the Paddy Power Political Book Awards. David voted remain in the EU referendum and has been a mainly inactive member of the Labour Party since he was a student.
 : My book is basically about the value divides in modern societies. I focused a lot on Britain, but I think a lot of it applies to America too. And I'm talking about not so much the kind of elite/non-elite divide—when we talk about elites we often mean I think the top three or five percent of the population—I’m talking about a much bigger divide between the educated and often mobile people, who I call the “Anywheres,” who tend to value openness, autonomy, fluidity—they can surf social change comfortably, they tend not to have strong group attachments. They are about 20/25 percent of the population, at least in Britain, possibly similar proportions in America. 
Then on the other hand you have the “Somewheres”.
They tend to be about half the population. So a big proportion of the population but much less politically and culturally influential. They tend to be less well educated. They tend to be more rooted to places. They tend to value security and familiarity, and they find a social change harder to surf and they also tend to have much stronger group attachments. 
There's also a very useful distinction that parallels my Anywhere/Somewhere distinction that comes from the American sociologist Talcott Parsons talking about human identity, he talks about people with achieved identities and ascribed identities. 
We all have a mixture of the two, but Anywheres tend to have a higher proportion of their sense of themselves that comes from their own achievements. They passed exams when they were young, they have been to good universities, they have more or less successful professional careers. So their sense of themselves is more kind of portable, they can fit in anywhere. 
Whereas if you're a Somewhere a bigger proportion of your identity is linked to particular places in groups and therefore is more easily discomfited when those groups or those places change as a result of immigration or just social change in general. 
So I think what obviously a lot of contemporary analysis is focusing on, this the educated versus the less educated divide—I think what is distinctive about my look at things is stressing both how large the educated group is and how dominant in our political system it has become, but also focusing on two things that distinguish the so-called Anywheres from the Somewheres. 
One is attitude, feelings about social change: on the one hand relatively positive, on the other hand pretty negative. 
And also feelings about group attachments: in the case of the Anywheres pretty weak, and in the case of the Somewheres much stronger. And this I think he has a huge impact on politics, on divisions so Anywheres both of right and left tend to stress politics of equality, kind of more universalist equality, a sort of horizontal politics if you like, whereas Somewheres tend to stress group attachments and more kind of vertical communities if you like.
One must stress here is that both of these world views are completely legitimate, both of them are completely decent, at least in the mainstream variations. But the problem for our politics in modern liberal democracies is that these world views conflict in certain fundamental ways. I'm an Anywhere myself, I mean most of the people watching this will be Anywheres, but I think Anywheres have over dominated politics and some ways have felt excluded, and that has created the instability that has led to Brexit in Britain and Trump in the United States, and I think we need to take those political events as a kind of a warning, a kind of early tremor of what might come, and we need to adjust. 
We need to create politics in which Somewheres feel they have a louder voice and feel that their priorities and their intuitions are taken seriously. Because I spend some time in my book just going through the extent, the domination of the political and policy agenda in a country like Britain, I think it applies to America too—of Anywhere priorities. If you look at everything from the economy to education policy to family policy to attitudes of social mobility and the achievement society, we have created societies in which cognitive ability has become the kind of gold standard of human esteem, human measurement. 
And a lot of people, by definition half the population, are always going to be in the bottom half of the cognitive abilities spectrum. But even people who are not in the bottom half of the cognitive abilities spectrum I think often feel rather alienated by society dominated by cognitive elites who perhaps feel less attachment to duty to non-elites, they are less paternalistic than the previous generations of elites.
I think one of the interesting questions is why is this happening now? On the face of it you might say that society has always been divided to some extent between the highly educated and mobile people with perhaps more open minds, and more rooted people with more skepticism about the outside world. But why is this now risen to such an important place in our politics? I think there are two reasons for that. 
One is that, and this is particularly true I think of Britain and Europe, one is that the framework of politics until quite recently has been essentially socioeconomic, it's the key blocks have been social classes, the issues have been about size of the state, attitudes to equality and inequality, these have been the things that have dominated British and European politics. In the last generation or so you've seen the emergence of what one might call sociocultural politics, politics that stresses issues of security and identity. And that's relatively new in Europe. It's perhaps not so new in America. Religion and race has always played a bigger role in American politics than it has in Europe, at least recently.
So I think you've seen sociocultural politics emerging to kind of challenge the traditional dominance of socioeconomic issues. And that is in itself partly a reaction to the much greater openness of our economies and our cultures over the last 20 or 30 years. It's a reaction against that openness that you've seen the sociocultural politics emerging so strongly. And the second reason is simply that the number of Anywheres as grown quite dramatically. I mean just go back 50 or 60 years... American common sense was essentially Somewhere common sense, British common sense was essentially Somewhere common sense. It is now in the public realm almost entirely Anywhere common sense. What it is to lead a good life, an achieved life is about being an Anywhere, it's about leaving, it's often about leaving your hometown going to a good university, becoming a member of the kind of upper professional class, being part of that cognitive elite. And it's logically impossible that everybody can do that. Not everybody can join the upper professional class. And I think we've kind of eroded the stories for people who are not part of that that successful achieved group. 
And you see it also in the way in which – we talk about the knowledge economy. I mean the knowledge economy by definition is one that is beneficial to the highly qualified, and at the same time, as we've seen the emergence the knowledge economy, we've also seen the disappearance of so many of those middling jobs that used to give people status and protection.
Somebody said to me the other day, I actually didn't write this in the book but it's something I've learned talking about the book is: somebody who used to be a manual worker said that so many jobs used to require not a huge amount of cognitive ability but a lot of experience to do well. And that I think applies particularly to the kind of skilled manual manufacturing jobs that we've lost so many of. And jobs that you couldn't just walk in off the street as a kind of successful Harvard graduate or whatever and do that job, there was a protection to your status for the fact that it required a lot of experience to do well. And I think we've seen that kind of replicated, we've seen it kind of draining away. 
This is so much more I think about this is Weber not Marx, I mean this is so much more about issues to do with status and recognition and what we might call, it sounds rather old-fashioned, what one might call “social honor” that people used to feel they had doing ordinary middling things that they no longer feel they have. They feel the kind of status, it's not just – that we've also had stagnant wages, particularly in America for a generation or more, exacerbated obviously by the financial crash, but certainly in Britain and Europe I don't think this is primarily an economic issue, it's much more a cultural issue, much more to do with status and recognition.
Obviously the two things are very tightly wound up together in many cases and rather hard to disentangle.
There's a schism between the idealism of globalization—i.e. that a more connected, educated, and mobile world is going to make everything better—and that of populism, which demands a more insular, community-orientated way of life and thus world at large. In 2016, both the U.K. and the U.S. made it overwhelmingly apparently that the schism had reached a boiling point: the UK voted to leave the European Union without, seemingly, any forethought as to what it would do to the economy. And America elected a reality TV star, Donald Trump, who advocated both sexual assault and violence against journalists. Good times! But   says we should have seen this coming—that there has been a battle between "Anywhere" and "Somewhere" tribes for decades, and that the issues don't all come down to "elites" versus "non-educated". It moreover comes down to a political system that favors one over the other. So what can we do? Perhaps see the other side for who they really are: one of us, just with a different view on the world. 's new book is The Road to Somewhere: The Populist Revolt and the Future of Politics.
Review: Whiteshift: Populism, Immigration and the Future of White Majorities by Eric Kaufmann — the future of mixed-race Britain
Some people will be dismayed, even angered, at the claims made by Eric Kaufmann, a mixed-race, London-based Canadian academic, in this extraordinary book.
He defends white identity politics and white ethnic “self interest”; believes the anti-racism taboo has become too all-encompassing; thinks economics has little to do with the populist revolt; defends qualified ethnic selection in immigration; and believes civic Britishness is too bland to bind us together.
Yet this is no polemic: he backs up his claims with numbers and close argument over a sometimes exhausting 600 pages. I have been following his work for some years and he has been quietly repeating one point: white people are not a different species, they have ethnic identities that matter to them just as minorities do, and suppressing that fact in recent decades — through the excessive influence of what he calls “left-modernism” — creates morbid political symptoms, the latest of which is Brexit.
I recall him explaining, many years ago, that ethnicity is not something inherently sinister, it is just attachment to ancestry and myths of ancestry. It can take an extreme form, as it did in the first part of the 20th century, but, as with religion or other forms of belief, extremism is not inherent.
And despite increased human mobility, ethnicity is not disappearing. About 80% of the world’s major countries have an ethnic majority, and being held together by such a majority seems to be a condition of national success — compare fragmented Africa with majoritarian east Asia.
Ethnic politics is now on the rise thanks to the decline of inter-state wars, religion and communism, and the growth in immigration to rich countries that has made white majorities more ethnically self-conscious. White people are already a minority in most major cities of North America, while minorities are projected to be in the majority in the US, Canada and New Zealand by 2050, with the UK following later in the century.
“So what?” will be the reaction of many of the educated and liberal-minded, who tend to have rather weak ethnic attachments. So a great deal, says Kaufmann. This shift is replacing white majority self-confidence with an existential insecurity, channelled by the lightning rod of immigration, and a reduced willingness to “indulge the anti-white ideology of the cultural left”.
A degree of turbulence is inevitable as we move from white ethnic homogeneity to mixed-race majorities by the end of the century, but Kaufmann is by no means apocalyptic. He does not believe in a liberal cosmopolitan future for the West, but rather a kind of post-white dominant ethnicity providing continuity with today’s white myths and symbols. We in the West are on the road to becoming less like homogeneous Iceland and more like homogeneous mixed-race Turkmenistan.
On the way, the challenge is both to give conservative members of white majorities hope for their group’s future and to allow cosmopolitans to celebrate diversity; to encompass both John Major’s “warm beer [and] invincible green suburbs” and Robin Cook’s chicken tikka masala.
The book explores the four different responses of white majorities to ethnic change: fight (voting for populists), repress (pretend nothing is happening), flee (avoid diverse neighbourhoods) and join (via friendship and intermarriage with minorities).
 
Competing norms: Gillian Duffy, called ‘that bigoted woman’ by Gordon Brown, talks to reporters, 2010
Kaufmann will be accused of providing comfort to the alt-right and downplaying majority power. However, he is punctilious in his definition of racism — antipathy to members of other ethnic groups, discrimination that denies equal treatment and a desire for racial purity — and believes populists are sometimes on the wrong side of that line: Nigel Farage’s infamous “Breaking point” poster is cited. He also thinks populists blur the line between Islam and Islamism.
He sympathises with black people in Brixton who feel swamped by white hipsters, as well as white people in Barking who feel alienated by rapid non-white immigration. And he prefers a “multivocal” approach to national identities, in which people from different backgrounds identify in different ways, rather than a dry, top-down, British-values approach.
On the other hand, he thinks liberals are wrong to think a strong attachment to one’s own ethnic group must mean hostility to others’. And he insists that a white “ethnic self-interest” in slowing immigration to preserve a culture and a way of life is legitimate. Polls show that most people of all races in both America and the UK agree with him.
The book ranges over recent history in America and the UK, and to a lesser extent the rest of Europe. As recently as the early 1960s, a majority of Americans opposed marriage between Catholics and Protestants, but the broader story during the country’s long immigration pause, from the 1920s to the late 1960s, was the de-Wasping of America, as Catholics and Jews joined the core white ethnic group. This is proving more complex for those from non-European and non-Christian backgrounds.
Anti-immigrant sentiment rose steadily in America from the 1960s to the early 1990s, then, thanks to the influence of the liberal baby-boomer generation, started to decline. It is now rising again and Donald Trump is the first president in decades to vow to cut legal immigration.
In the UK, Kaufmann notes the battle between competing norms. The anti-racism norm that had suppressed most criticism of immigration, by linking it to issues of racial justice, began to erode after the arrival of white east Europeans. And as Gordon Brown with his “bigoted woman” moment and Emily Thornberry with her England flag tweet have discovered, anti-racism can now apply to the white working class, too.
He also has the best one-sentence summary of last year’s general election: “A generational realignment reflecting a Brexit realignment reflecting an immigration realignment.” Baby-boomers here have become less liberal on immigration — though not on race, gender and sexuality — but he does not believe more liberal younger generations will change things markedly. Populism will remain a powerful force until immigration and rapid ethnic change are visibly slowed.
On segregation and integration, he shows how white behaviour is similar everywhere, from liberal Canada to restrictive Denmark. Most white British citizens want to live in areas that are 70%-plus white — and most still do: 80% of white Britons live in wards that are 90% white, while nearly half of minorities live in “majority minority” wards. We mainly still stick to our own.
I have a few reservations. In explaining the powerful grip of left-modernism, Kaufmann overlooks the impacts of two world wars, decolonisation and the Holocaust in delegitimising all forms of nationalism and ethnic attachment after 1945. I also remain a bit confused about his happy ending, an open ethnic creolisation under the canopy of an essentially white ethnic nationalism. And if ethnicity is such a persistently powerful force in human affairs, how come the new generations of liberal-minded graduates shed it so easily?
Nevertheless, this is a tour de force that could expand the so-called “Overton window” — the range of what is acceptable to say — on these central issues.
Blueprint: How DNA Makes Us Who We Are by Robert Plomin? - review
 
 
This is an important and challenging book that reveals to the general reader what has quietly become a new scientific consensus: psychological traits, including intelligence, are significantly influenced by our genes. In the age-old nature versus nurture argument, nature seems to have stolen a march.
Physical traits such as height have always belonged to nature but psychology and personality were thought to be mainly the product of environment. Yet genes, according to Robert Plomin, account for half of psychological differences, from depression to school attainment, while families and schools account for just five per cent. Even weight is said to be 70 per cent inherited.
These things, he says, have been long established by twin and adoption studies but now, with the sequencing of the human genome, we can detect the actual genetic basis of human difference, not through a single gene for this or that but through thousands of small differences that can be aggregated together to predict psychological traits, so-called “polygenic scores”.
We can also now spend just £100 on a personal genomics kit and discover, apparently, how our children are going to perform at school and whether they will be susceptible to Alzheimer’s.
This book will help sell a lot of those kits but will shock, and maybe anger, a lot of people too. A survey of 5,000 British adults found that people estimated the genetic influence on school achievement to be just 29 per cent while genetic research, says Plomin, estimates it at 60 per cent.
The worldviews of both Left and Right are discomfited: the Left’s stress on the environment and a “society is to blame” narrative is undermined, as are the Right’s ideals of personal responsibility and self-invention. Yet Plomin, a liberal, humane American, and now the “doyen” of the once despised discipline of behavioural genetics, is no one’s idea of an intolerant “you can’t buck nature” conservative.
He strives to make us feel unthreatened by his claims (and makes no mention of race) by pointing out that if the first law of genetics is that like begets like, the second law is that like does not beget like, and genes are “probabilistic propensities not predetermined programming”. But in the next breath he jauntily tells us that parenting makes little difference to outcomes for children, that private school fees are largely a waste of money and that kindness and resilience are more nature than nurture.
This is far too much genetic determinism for some scientists and the journal Nature has slammed his book, pointing out that in education the significance of good teaching as well as diet and home conditions “have been established irrefutably”. And surely childhood trauma, such as losing a parent, and plain bad parenting can leave a big mark too — just look at the prison population.
Determinism and striving for a better world are uneasy bedfellows. Plomin probably underestimates the extent to which his message can reinforce existing unfairnesses and encourage fatalism — if fatness is mainly in the genes, what’s the point of trying to stay thin?
It is true that the more equal the social environment the more significant genetic differences will become, rather as the gender division of labour in professions in egalitarian Scandinavia have become more, not less, marked recently.
This will not create a meritocratic caste, says Plomin, because intelligence is only 50 per cent inherited and “reversion to the mean” causes clever people often to have only average children.
Moreover, being genetically blessed with high intelligence is its own reward. So he favours meritocratic selection for top jobs but not a meritocratic society that sharply divides winners from losers. A vital distinction. Plomin may overclaim for genes but he has provided important new evidence in a never-ending argument.
The Future of Capitalism: Facing the New Anxieties by Paul Collier
 
 
There is endless speculation about a new centre party filling the gap left by the supposed lurch to Right and Left of the two main parties. The trouble with these plans is that they seem designed to restore the liberal establishment politics of the past 25 years which led to our current divisions in the first place. This book is a manifesto for a more bracing and communitarian kind of “hard centre”, cutting across the old Left-Right divide.
Paul Collier, who made his name as a development economist, is nothing if not ambitious. He has a plan for healing three great rifts: the geographic divide between declining provincial towns and thriving metropolitan centres; the worldview and value divide between the educated and the less educated (what I called in my own recent book the Anywheres versus Somewheres); and the global divide between rich countries and poor.
He has original things to say, both in his diagnosis of the three rifts and in his policy solutions. For Collier belongs to that sadly small band of truly useful social science academics who read the most relevant research, transcending the narrow specialisation of the academy, and apply it in a pragmatic manner to contemporary problems.
Above all he understands that the roots of our current discontents are not just economic but cultural and psychological too: in an age of more socially fluid and meritocratic societies, which sharply divide winners and losers, how can most people be valued and recognised and feel able to lead purposeful, successful lives?
The overheating metropolis: Paul Collier suggests the introduction of an “agglomeration tax” (Getty Images)
One of the reasons that, despite being an economist, he understands the cultural rifts he writes about is that he has lived them. He comes from working-class Sheffield and rose into the elite via grammar school and Oxford and then went on to academic success at Oxford, Harvard and Paris. His cousin, born on the same day, also won a place at grammar school but her life was derailed by the early death of her father and she became a teenage mother (as did her own daughters).
The book’s rather dense opening chapter also tackles the philosophical failings of modern liberalism which combine, he argues, the selfishness of “economic man” with the abstract selflessness of utilitarianism in which paternalistic state experts calculate “the greatest happiness of the greatest number”. This promotes the individual above the collective and misses what really matters in sustaining real communities, local and national, which is bottom-up reciprocal obligations.
The communitarian social democracy of the British Labour movement, rooted in the anxieties and priorities of places like Sheffield, did understand this. Briefly, after the war, this philosophy set the tone for the whole nation. Collier was a child of this period and is unashamedly nostalgic for it. But as he says, the conditions for it were created by a shared identity forged through a supreme national effort in the Second World War.
How can a renewed social democracy heal the wounds he describes in the absence of such a backdrop? He does not really explain. But with his economist hat on he does come up with some useful discreet policy ideas.
The most interesting (derived from the 19th century American Henry George) is the idea of taxing the benefits of agglomeration in metropolitan centres which currently go mainly to landlords and professional workers. The high-earning corporate lawyer in London should pay a higher tax rate than his or her equivalent in Sheffield because part of their higher income is simply derived from location.
This suggestion may not be popular with many higher-earning Evening Standard readers but it is not a cranky idea and some version of it works in New York. In theory, the overheating metropolis would be cooled a little and funds would be raised to stimulate provincial growth.
Collier is good on the persistent failings of our non-academic, post-school training (especially compared with Germanic countries) which he neatly describes as “a mis-ranking of esteem between cognitive and non-cognitive training”. And he points out that moving from school into non-cognitive employment is more demanding than continuing with academic work and deserves more, not less, state support than moving into higher education.
He also talks sense on diverging family norms and the case for more state support to help lower income families stay together. Collier can be a bit slapdash with his facts and perhaps tries to cram too much into one book, meaning some ideas feel half-digested. He has a good turn of phrase, though, and can be witty too, on the social bias of Spellcheck for example. This book is not an easy read but it is an important one — the revenge of the clever provincial biting the metropolitan hand that has fed him so generously.
Fromm 1941 to Now - The American Interest
 
Sometimes even flawed books have their merits. Take Erich Fromm’s Escape from Freedom…
Erich Fromm’s classic work, Escape from Freedom, about the group psychology and personality traits that made Nazism possible, was almost certainly on my undergraduate bookshelf. I cannot recall actually reading the book, but that strand of Marx-cum-Freud represented by Fromm, Wilhelm Reich, and others appealed to my impressionable young leftist mind. Opposing the repression of the workers by capitalism and the repression of our libidos by pleasure-hating authoritarians was neatly melded together into a single, simple song of liberation.
Forty years on I am far less impressed. Escape from Freedom is a useful reminder that, notwithstanding the contemporary failings of Western academia, many things in our intellectual life have vastly improved. For Escape from Freedom is in many ways a poor book. Repetitive and clunkily written, it is full of mechanistic quasi-Marxist “dialectical” thinking about social processes and group behavior but provides almost zero evidence and very few references to other academic work to back up its sweeping claims. If one regards it as a work of social science or social psychology it compares very badly to recent works like Robert Putnam’s Bowling Alone or Jonathan Haidt’s The Righteous Mind, which at least make some effort to provide evidence for their claims about social trends and evolving values.
But if one takes a more charitable view and regards Escape from Freedom instead as a work of Frankfurt School social philosophy, it is not without interest. And it was, after all, written in 1941 in the German-born Fromm’s second language, English.
It may also be the case that its ideas, above all the focus on the anomic individual in a mass society, have been so influential that what now seems almost banal were highly original at the time. Another example might be Eric Voegelin’s argument that totalitarian ideologies resemble religious movements in non-trivial ways, which was shockingly novel when he introduced it in 1938; now the challenge is to remind some people that there are non-trivial differences between them.
Fromm believed that the striving for freedom was a natural human impulse but that many people fear the freedoms of modernity to the point that they long to return to the certainties and order of the premodern world. “What characterizes medieval in contrast to modern society is its lack of individual freedom. . . . But although a person was not free in the modern sense neither was he alone and isolated.”
Indeed, Fromm seems rather fond of the womb-like medieval world. And, in his favor, he generally sticks up for maternal love and family ties unlike his two masters, Marx and Freud, and most of his fellow Frankfurt schoolers, who tended to see the family as a crucible of repression.
Lutheranism and Calvinism both, Fromm believed, were systems of thought that celebrated the emergence of the autonomous individual from the mass conformity of medieval life and the Catholic Church only to demand a new, and extreme, form of direct submission to God himself. This submission came to be expressed within a generation or two of its theological origin in a ferocious work ethic. Weber famously explained the process whereby “salvation anxiety” shape-shifted into a set of attitudes that aligned with the impulses of early capitalism. Fromm makes a similar argument but is more concerned with feelings of loss and disorientation: “Protestantism was the answer to the human needs of the frightened, uprooted, and isolated individual who had to orient and to relate himself to a new world.”
The most striking part of the book is Fromm’s discussion of the Adam and Eve story. Fromm’s parents were Orthodox Jews, one of his grandfathers was a rabbi, and he took Jewish theology seriously, studying under a Hasidic scholar while completing his doctorate in sociology at the University of Heidelberg. But unlike the conventional view of that story, Fromm regarded the breaking of God’s command not to eat from the tree of knowledge of good and evil as an act of liberation. “Acting against God’s orders means man freeing himself from coercion, emerging from the unconscious existence of pre-human life to the level of man. Acting against the command of authority, committing a sin, is in its positive human aspect the first act of freedom, that is, the first human act.”
Fromm’s interpretation certainly stood athwart of the Christian “original sin” view of the story, and that is what gave his interpretation its shock value. But it actually was not far from some rabbinic views that saw the foundational stories in Genesis as “set-up” narratives—in the case of the story of Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, to problematize the reality of human disobedience to authority. That is, after all, in large part what the rest of the Bible is about.
The latter part of the book, certainly the most cited and best remembered, is dedicated to a discussion of Mein Kampf, Hitler’s neurotic authoritarian character, and how Germans, especially of the lower-middle class, longed for submission in a movement appealing to their collective spirit of sado-masochism. Written before the United States entered the war, aspects of the analysis seemed remarkably prescient to many at the time. Together with Franz Neumann’s Behemoth, also completed in 1941, Fromm’s Escape from Freedom constituted half of the interpretive couplet that English-speakers relied on during the war to try to make sense of Nazism and Nazi Germany.
Fromm’s analysis here seems plausible, if not exactly true or provable. And yet it is so general as to be of little use in understanding the world—a bit like saying that most of us in different ways are trying to find a balance between freedom and security in our lives.
Moreover, almost by definition people are drawn to extremist political movements by fear of one sort or another. But why focus on fear of freedom rather than fear of economic loss or fear of the “other” or fear of the loss of dignity, as a modern-day Fromm might stress?
Fromm would probably argue that the fear of freedom was the master fear of which the other forms were mere subsidiaries, but the case is never made, merely asserted. And why does fear of freedom become a group phenomenon and not just a feature of individual psychology that is always there among a certain proportion of the population? When he describes his ideal of the healthy person, who is able to embrace freedom through emotional spontaneity, he talks just about individuals, not groups. (His ideal of emotional health comes close to the destructive bohemian notion of freedom as lack of constraint.)
The lower-middle class are selected as the main freedom-fearing group because of Marxist assumptions slipped into the argument: They are stuck in the middle between resentment of those above them and fear of those below, while their hard-won respectability and savings are constantly threatened by the vagaries of monopoly capitalism. Today there would at least be some attempt to provide survey evidence suggesting that people from certain social strata are more attracted to particular values and attitudes. Fromm provides none; in fact, I don’t think there is a single number in the whole book.
The success of Nazism and other extremist movements required, by definition, a critical mass of individuals with personalities attracted to, or at least ready to tolerate, the movements. But this is merely a necessary, not a sufficient, condition for success—otherwise how do we explain the fact that Nazism did not happen in all modern societies?—and it means that personality as such lacks any real explanatory value at the political level.
So anybody looking to Fromm’s 1941 analysis of the last great crisis of liberalism for clues as to how to respond to today’s political anxieties about populism are going to be disappointed. Even if fear of freedom and the authoritarian personalities it allegedly produces were still stalking Europe, it is such a different place from the Europe of the 1930s that it is impossible to imagine a repeat of that disaster.
Europe today is very much richer than in the 1930s with few people suffering the real, material hardship that was common in the prewar decades, with much lower standards of living, much more threadbare welfare states, mass unemployment, and, in Germany, the great savings-destroying monster of inflation. The rich liberal democracies also have liberal political norms far more deeply embedded than in the still-young democracies of the 1930s, when deferential, authoritarian, and bigoted attitudes were still widespread in all social classes.
Above all, today’s Europeans are on average very much older than in the 1930s. Extremism is a young man’s game. Germany in the 1920s and 1930s was full of purposeless, angry young men, many of them brutalized by service in the Great War, who were happily recruited into the violent Freikorps street gangs. Were these people escaping freedom? Or were they feeling angry and discarded and therefore vulnerable to the appeal of demagogues of extreme Left and Right?
Compare those street gangs with what has been happening in Greece in recent years: Despite a fall in living standards of more than 25 percent, comparable to the Great Depression, and an easily stoked sense of grievance against Brussels and Berlin, people have by and large stayed at home and grumbled.
This does not mean that Fromm was wrong to seek an explanation for political events in forces outside economics, in human psychology and group dynamics. The most plausible explanations for today’s pushback against mainstream liberalism represented by Brexit, Trump, and European populism are to be found in culture and identity, as politics has tilted from socio-economic to socio-cultural themes in the face of rapid social change and much more fluid and open societies.
But this is less about the extreme pathologies of authoritarianism that Fromm identified and more about the humdrum yearning for esteem, meaning, and respect: the quest to heal the wounds of a democratic-egalitarian age in which the promise of political equality clashes with the reality of economic and status inequality. Nietzsche’s “ressentiments” are more relevant today than the suppressed fury of Fromm’s deferential lower-middle class.
Just as the move from an agrarian to an industrial society produced various traumas and social pathologies, so the move from an industrial to a post-industrial one is producing different traumas today—less challenging materially, perhaps, but at least as challenging psychologically.
For it is worth recalling that industrial society did not destroy traditional religious belief; indeed, the new urban centers created new forms of mass Christianity such as Methodism. Nor did it destroy the family; levels of illegitimacy in England fell during the course of the 19th century. Moreover, it also created new collective class identities and forms of recognition associated with the dignity of labor.
Indeed, it may be that industrial society, for all its misanthropies, was better at distributing status than our emerging post-industrial society. The latter, with its characteristic individualism and secularism—at least in the West—appears to be in the process of diminishing many traditional roles, group attachments, sources of unconditional recognition (via family, religion, nation) and geographic and ethnic rootedness. Add to that the relentless stress on meritocracy and the failure to protect the status (and incomes) of the less able, and it is hardly surprising that a political counter-reaction has emerged.
But people today do not so much fear freedom as the humiliations of relative failure and neglect in more open societies, humiliations made ever more transparent by modern media. With the quite recent emergence of education and cognitive ability as the gold standard of human esteem, how is the half of humanity that is always going to be in the bottom half of the cognitive ability spectrum supposed to feel respect and purpose?
Now, this a question that is a proper subject for social psychology—a discipline that Fromm enthusiastically identified with and assumed, in the introduction to Escape from Freedom, would become the master discipline of the social sciences. Yet after 1945 it was economics, with its individualistic and rational-actor paradigm, that became the dominant discipline in social science while social psychology struggled to establish itself in public consciousness.
There are, no doubt, many departments of social psychology and probably hundreds if not thousands of professors of social psychology in the English-speaking world alone. Yet I can name just one of them in Britain—Miles Hewstone, who works in the tradition of Gordon Allport’s contact hypothesis about racial prejudice—and just Jonathan Haidt in the United States.
Social psychology with its inherent interdisciplinarity and ambitious scope is perhaps not best suited to a world of intense academic specialization. And it may be that after emerging from the Fromm-like Marxist-Freudian fog it swung too far the other way, becoming a branch of marketing, advising companies about how best to sell things to people via their emotions. (The Left was also suspicious of its interest in groups and group attachment, at least for ethnic majorities.)
Sound social psychology did not disappear altogether, of course. There was the work in the 1960s of Robert Nisbet about the weakening of “intermediate” institutions such as the family that left people vulnerable to powerful group attachments, that might be said to act as a kind of link between Fromm and Robert Putnam in the 1990s with his bridging and bonding social capital. Many other bridges can be identified by experts and initiates in the field, no doubt; BUT the policy reach and impact of social psychology never extended as far as Fromm and others anticipated.
There does now, at last, seem to be an appetite for more relevant mainstream social psychology. I wrote a book last year called The Road to Somewhere about the value divides in modern liberal democracies that have contributed to the new instability in our politics. It was a work of amateur social psychology based on what the British Social Attitudes surveys tell us about how attitudes have shifted and polarized over the past couple of generations. The book did better than expected, suggesting that there is a powerful interest in this kind of thinking. The popularity of behavioral economics might also be a function of social psychology’s low profile.
Fromm, like all of us, was a man of his time, not least in his very traditional view of gender relations. But strip out the mechanistic Marxism and here was a thinker at least looking in the right places about how the private realm of the individual’s emotions connects with the public realm of politics. And here was a thinker with the hope that human freedom would prove the strongest force of all:
But man is not only made by history—history is made by man. The solution of this seeming contradiction constitutes the field of social psychology. Its task is to show not only how passions, desires, anxieties change and develop as a result of the social process, but also how man’s energies thus shaped into specific forms in their turn become productive forces, molding the social process.
It is a typical dialectical mouthful, but nevertheless breaks decisively with the deterministic and nihilist tradition in German thought and identifies a humane and ambitious intellectual framework for our new age of anxiety.


#3 What lies beyond the meritocracy?   - The Young Foundation
Meritocracy is the worst system in the world for distributing status, responsibility and rewards, apart from all the others, to paraphrase Churchill on democracy.
If one’s main priority is the efficient running of society, then ‘IQ plus effort’ is a better selection criterion for high-status jobs than nepotism. But it does not necessarily make society any fairer or more humane.
Meritocratic selection systems sharply divide winners from losers, while giving the latter little or no psychological protection from their failure. And as Michael Young pointed out 60 years ago in his critique of meritocracy, people blessed with advanced analytical/cognitive skills may well feel less obligation to those of below average intelligence, than the rich felt traditionally to the poor.
For most of human history (including in the 1950s when Young was writing), cognitive ability was scattered more or less randomly through society, with only a small minority attending university or similar elite academies. But in recent decades, a huge sorting process has taken place, in which all the young exam-passers have been hoovered up and sent in unprecedented numbers into higher education. In Britain, there has been a 400 per cent increase in student numbers since 1990. (This has coincided with a sharp decline in the prestige of so much non-graduate employment.)
That does not mean that we now live in a true meritocracy. The private school domination of high-status jobs has actually weakened somewhat in recent decades but family income in childhood still correlates very highly with educational and career success. This has been reinforced by something known by the ugly phrase ‘assortative mating’, which describes the fact that people in high-status jobs, requiring high cognitive ability, are far more likely to have children with similar people.
The children of these couples do not (yet) form a genetic elite of the highly able, but they are far more likely to be brought up by two parents who are both well connected and understand what is required for children of even middling ability to enter good universities and obtain higher professional jobs. The result is the emergence of a kind of hereditary meritocracy.
Young’s book is more relevant today than when it was written. That is because one form of human aptitude, cognitive ability, has become even more the gold standard of human esteem. And as cognitive ability has risen in esteem we have seen a relative decline in the esteem attached to other aptitudes—manual/technical skill, caring and nurturing qualities, character and virtuous behaviour, experience, simple hard work. Moreover, the social institutions that used to value you for just being you—such as the family, the church and the nation—have all been in relative decline since the 1950s.
A successful society must manage the tension between the inequality of esteem that arises from relatively open competition for highly skilled jobs and the ethos of equality of esteem that flows from democratic citizenship.
That means a democratic achievement society that wants to avoid widespread disaffection must sufficiently respect and reward those of middling and lower cognitive ability, and provide meaning and value for people who cannot — or do not want to — achieve in the examination room and career market.
For many people on the left, this is mainly a problem of income and wealth inequality. But inequality has not, in fact, been rising in many of the countries, including Brexit Britain, where there has been the biggest push-back against the cognitive elites. It is true that slow or non-existent wage growth is harder to bear when a small minority, most notably bankers, seem insulated from austerity. But this misses an even bigger story about esteem and how valued people feel in the social order.
Just as the move from an agrarian to an industrial society produced various traumas, so the move from an industrial to a post-industrial one is producing different traumas today — less challenging materially but at least as challenging psychologically.
It is worth recalling that industrial society did not destroy traditional religious belief. Indeed, the new urban centres created new forms of mass Christianity such as Methodism. Nor did it destroy the family, levels of illegitimacy in England fell in the course of the 19th century. Moreover, it also created new collective class identities and forms of recognition associated with the dignity of labour.
Indeed, it may be that industrial society was better at distributing status than our emerging post-industrial society. The latter with its characteristic individualism and secularism, at least in the west, appears to be in the process of diminishing many traditional roles, group attachments, sources of unconditional recognition (family, religion, nation) and geographic rootedness.
Add to that the relentless stress on meritocracy and the failure to protect the status of the less successful and it is hardly surprising that a political counter-reaction has emerged.
So how can these damaging trends of the meritocratic achievement society be slowed or reversed? The simple answer is that there is nothing after the meritocracy. Meritocracy in some imperfect form, distorted by the advantages that parents will always be able to pass on to their children, will always be with us.
The attempt to spread status more evenly in society is indeed a quasi-utopian project — is not status a zero-sum game? — and it will not happen swiftly or even mainly through policy changes. But we can choose a direction of travel that will help to mitigate the negative effects of meritocracy, above all by raising the status of aptitudes other than cognitive ability, which can look after itself.
And there are some promising trends, many of them quite mainstream. There is, for example, a growing recognition that those citadels of cognitive power, the universities, have expanded too fast and too many school leavers attend them. The government has recently been focussing much more on the 50 per cent who don’t go to university and labour market pressure, especially after Brexit, is set to improve the training, pay and status of many manual and technical occupations.
After years of being brain-washed into thinking that the path to achievement and security for their children ran only through A levels and a good university—many of Britain’s parents, and their children, are beginning to see other options as equally promising.
There are other, rather familiar, policy ideas that can help to mitigate the meritocracy.
Reviving the old idea of the “dignity of labour” to help raise the status of the 10m-plus jobs that are described as low skill is feasible albeit difficult, but it will only have meaning if we continue to raise the minimum wage. Many of the best employers, like the car insurance company Admiral, have shown that even jobs like working in a call centre can be rewarding and meaningful.
Another is place. Too many places in Britain have lost their purpose and their status and therefore wave goodbye to most of their ambitious people. Many would like to stay if there were decent prospects for them. Vigorous regional policy combined with spreading more national assets, cultural institutions and government departments, around the country and out of London can help.
Strengthening the support mechanisms of the family and valuing the work that is done in the private realm, mainly by women, in nurturing children and giving them a sense of their value is essential to a post-meritocratic society.
This connects to the single most important aspect of meritocracy mitigation and that is raising the status (and pay) of caring roles, both paid and unpaid.
There is already a broad consensus that caring roles in the social care system and nursing are grossly undervalued and underpaid but, to date, insufficient pressure on politicians to do something about it.
I believe that will gradually change partly because of the increased political power of women, as illustrated by the #MeToo movement. But it may require modern feminism to change its focus. In recent years mainstream feminism has had an androgynous flavour (men and women are not only equal but essentially the same) focusing on the public realm and equal competition with men.
More support for the family and traditional female aptitudes of care and nurture has been regarded by many feminists, though not I think by most women, as reactionary. But it is possible that a more pluralistic and family-friendly form of feminism may develop that can genuinely respect the goals and ambitions of both public and private realm focussed women.
It was women in Michael Young’s book who led the revolt against the meritocracy, in real life it is women who are central to mitigating its worst effects.
Review: Rise: Life Lessons in Speaking Out, Standing Tall & Leading the Way by Gina Miller — a hard-to-love heroine
 
Gina Miller rose to prominence as the face of the highly charged legal battle to ensure that the government’s authority to trigger Article 50, the formal notification to leave the EU, was ratified by parliament.
In retrospect it is hard to see what all the fuss was about because it was always clear that a large majority of MPs would respect the referendum result. Nevertheless, the symbolism was important and Miller was right to insist on “taking back control” via a vote in the House of Commons.
Her book, Rise, reveals that this was not Miller’s initiative, but that of the law firm Mishcon de Reya. Miller — the founder of a successful marketing company and later with her third husband, Alan Miller, of a financial watchdog charity, the True and Fair Campaign — had played a minor role in the Remain campaign and was upset by the result. Her 11-year-old son, Luca, wept on hearing the news. But a bright spark at Mishcon who spotted her speaking at an event on diversity in the City a few days after the result realised that she was just the woman to front a lawsuit against the government. Miller thought so too.
She is not only a passionate Remainer, but someone who had always wanted to study law and emulate her beloved father, a former attorney-general of Guyana, where she spent her early childhood. He instilled in her a love of the British system of justice. The Article 50 story might be seen as another example of people of immigrant and colonial heritage taking British traditions more seriously than the natives.
The book, however, is only fleetingly about Brexit. It is mainly a Hollywood-style “triumph against adversity” self-help book, directed mainly at ambitious professional women. The trouble is it quickly becomes trite and repetitive as our heroine bounces back from one disaster after another: beating the bullies at Moira House boarding school in Eastbourne, East Sussex, where she was sent from Guyana at age 11, giving birth to a disabled child at age 23, escaping an allegedly abusive second marriage (her ex-husband vehemently denies the claim), and setting up her marketing company in the face of some Weinstein-style predatory behaviour from potential clients.
She certainly had a good early grounding in resilience. Not only was she sent far away as a young child, but at age 13 political upheaval in Guyana meant that her parents could no longer fully fund her education, so she had to pretend to be 16 and get a job as a chambermaid in a hotel where she worked for two hours each morning before starting lessons. However, this uncommon life gets turned into too many cringe-making clichés: “I believe that your strength comes from inside you — from knowing who you are”, or, “We all need to remember that other people matter”, or, “Hope is a delicate flower that needs to be kept alive with positive energy”. And her homely ideas, her theory of “tough softness”, for example, are often rather clunkily backed up by some recent academic paper.
If the book has a wider public interest, it is as a case study in the new incivility in public life, exacerbated by social media. Bigoted bores used to sound off in the corner of the pub; now they can speak to the world. Worse, they can speak directly to the object of their scorn, in this case the well-spoken brown lady on television who appeared to be trying to stop Brexit.
She was the subject of a tirade of abuse, often racist, via letter, email, Twitter and Facebook and won a court case against Rhodri Philipps, the 4th Viscount St Davids, who had offered a bounty of £5,000 to anyone who would run her over.
Miller, who is 53, was understandably upset by this experience; she even briefly considered leaving the country, and much of the book is an expression of disappointment at how intolerant Britain has become. She believes we are living through “an undoing of all those decades . . . where we were more civilised, kinder, nicer, more tolerant people” and that it is “not just a small minority who hate my guts”.
The problem is she provides no evidence for this, or any explanation why it might be happening now, beyond platitudes about divisive demagogues. She doesn’t quantify the abuse she received. How many abusive messages did she attract? One thousand? Ten thousand? Fifty thousand? Even the last figure would represent only a tiny fraction of the population. We know that hate-filled people are better able to disseminate their hate, but there is no evidence that there are more of them, or that Brexit has rolled back the recent decades of more liberal attitudes.
Miller quotes the figures of surging hate crime incidents reported to the police — the 19 per cent increase to 80,393 in 2016-17 — but, as she admits, this is in part because of the greater official encouragement to report such incidents. Digging below these headline figures, there is no evidence of any surge in abuse. The number of court convictions for hate crimes has held steady at about 12,000 a year. The Crime Survey of England and Wales, the most reliable survey of people’s experience of crime, finds hate crime falling in the past decade.
There was a brief Brexit-related blip in reported hate crime incidents (the vast majority are shouted abuse) that lasted about three months before returning to previous levels. This has not shown up as a lasting trend in the Crime Survey. Looking just at race hate crime, the numbers remained essentially unchanged over the Brexit period.
The book’s relentless and unsubtle narrative makes it hard to warm to Miller as a person, with the important exception of her moving account of her love for her first child, Lucy-Ann, who was born with brain damage.
The paradox of this book is that it is about resilience and standing up for yourself, but unavoidably focuses on Miller as a victim. She is clearly a forceful and resourceful woman — although perhaps not a popular team player — and many less tough-minded people will find it hard to follow her remarkable example.
Brexit and the voice of Britain's hidden majority
Politicians neglect unfashionable but cherished values of family and community
A friend of mine, the social researcher Geoff Dench, died a few weeks ago. You are unlikely to have heard of him, although you may have heard of his close associate, Michael Young (father of the mischievous Toby). Young helped to write Labour’s 1945 manifesto and then fell out of love with the party and wrote a celebrated critique of the new meritocratic class, The Rise of the Meritocracy, and founded the Consumer Association and the Open University, among other things. 
Both Dench and Young, who died in 2002, would probably have described themselves as communitarian social democrats. And Dench was that rare thing, a socially conservative social scientist whose concern for family, community and working-class men put him at odds with most of his discipline and eventually drove him out of the academy.
Dench was, in fact, heroically out of step with the times. He was critical of both meritocracy and feminism – or at least of their unintended consequences – two of modern liberalism’s most powerful ideas, strongly supported right across the political spectrum.  Alongside Young, he argued that meritocracy was inadequate as an organising principle for society because it divided people too sharply into winners and losers and prioritised the public realm over the private, despite the primary importance of the latter to most people. 
His critique of what he called “state feminism” focused on its downplaying of the civilising role that family motivations play for men. The flip-side of female autonomy is men – especially working-class men – feeling superfluous. He pointed to the rising male suicide rate, the sharp fall in male labour market participation and the poor performance of white working-class boys in education.  
So, you might think, Dench represented the last gasp of a dying tradition, forlornly standing against the onward march of progress. Yet this member of the awkward squad can claim to have foreshadowed the push back against modern liberalism represented by Brexit, Trump and the rise of populism. I was never able to discuss Brexit with him because for the past few years he had suffered from progressive supranuclear palsy, a brain disease that had prevented him from talking. But his widow, Belinda Brown, confirms that he was a strong Brexit supporter.
Brexit represents a rebellion against the over-domination of metropolitan “Anywhere” priorities of mobility, openness and individual autonomy
For Brexit represents a rebellion against some of the trends he most disliked in modern society: the rise of cognitive ability as the gold standard of human esteem and the correspondingly reduced status of so much non-graduate employment; and the over-domination of metropolitan “Anywhere” priorities of mobility, openness and individual autonomy. He saw this liberal graduate world view as shallow and hubristic and at odds with powerful human instincts.
Dench’s death also made me think of the political credo of the late American political scientist Daniel Bell, who declared himself a market-friendly social democrat in economics, a liberal in politics and somewhat conservative in social and cultural matters. It is a Left-Right combination that I feel attracted to myself, and I think represents the “hidden majority” in most modern liberal democracies. 
For historical reasons, neither main party of the centre-Left or centre-Right, anywhere in the rich world, has come to embody this combination although the Conservative manifesto at the last election came quite close. The failure of our political institutions to represent that combination was another factor behind Brexit and the continuing sense of instability in our politics. 
Of course, Bell’s credo begs some questions: most importantly, what does it mean to be “somewhat conservative in social and cultural matters”? Like everything else, small-c conservatism evolves. As recently as the late Eighties, a large majority would have opposed homosexuality; now many, if not most, support gay marriage. Many smallc conservatives now embrace things that would have been considered wildly liberal 50 years ago.
How to combine the concerns of reasonable liberals and reasonable smallc conservatives is the great political challenge of our times, and neither of the two main parties has yet found the formula 
But at any given time one can point to certain “hidden majority” beliefs that are of far less concern, or even actively opposed, by liberal graduate “Anywheres”. Here are a few: national citizen rights before universal rights, social stability before high mobility, men and women are equal but not the same, greater priority on raising the basic level of competence of everyone in education and better options for those not heading to university. 
In policy terms, that would mean a return to more moderate levels of immigration, much more support for the family in the tax system and elsewhere, greater stress on order in the classroom and ensuring no one leaves school illiterate or innumerate, and a respected vocational and technical alternative to university. These are hardly policies for an altRight manifesto, yet (with the exception of reducing immigration) mainstream parties do not focus on them.
How to combine the concerns of reasonable liberals and reasonable smallc conservatives is the great political challenge of our times, and neither of the two main parties has yet found the formula.  The various new centre parties now being touted would represent the first group but not the second. Perhaps it is time to revive David Owen’s old Social Democratic Party. Apparently there are plans to do just that. Geoff would have been pleased. 
It's right to make exams harder, but our focus should be on the bottom of the class
The new tougher GCSE exams, with their correspondingly lower pass marks – designed to save the nation’s blushes – have given us another glimpse of just how low our education standards have fallen in recent decades. Apparently it was possible to get a pass in chemistry answering fewer than 10 per cent of the questions. A report by the University of Sheffield back in 2010 found that 22 per cent of 16- to 19-year-olds were functionally innumerate and 17 per cent were illiterate.
Michael Gove was right to stop the dilution of grades and standards with his new exams, but within that overall objective it is surely a national priority to focus on that bottom 20 per cent, especially with an eye on Brexit and employability. An education system is not just about sifting out the brightest and best and ensuring they are stretched to the maximum; it is also, in the phrase of the American writer Christopher Lasch, about raising “the general competence level of society”. 
This will not be achieved by shuffling some children off into easier exams or vocational qualifications at 14. When taught well in ordered classrooms, only a very small percentage of children are not capable of achieving decent results in the academic subjects – English, Maths, some basic science, an overview of their nation’s history, a crack at a foreign language – when they are 16, as some of our best state schools are now showing. 
After the age of 16, those without the inclination or ability to move into the A-level stream should have decent vocational options. The new T-level qualification is one attempt to provide this. T-levels will never compete in terms of prestige with A-levels and a university degree, but they should be more than a dumping ground for the non-academic and help to set people up for productive work.
Celebrating GCSE results: when taught well, only a very small percentage of children are not capable of achieving decent results Credit: Christopher Pledger
Alas, T-levels are in danger of becoming yet another failed vocational experiment.  The full roll-out is not due until 2023, but they are unlikely to attract the children of middle-class or aspirational parents. There is also the problem of premature specialisation. At the tender age of 16, children have to opt for one sector, such as transport or construction or childcare, where they might then be stuck for the rest of their working lives.
Brexit may help to focus the country’s attention on this issue. Highstatus, highskill, well-paid jobs fill themselves. The real issue for society is to persuade people to do the lower-status jobs with little inherent job satisfaction, especially when notions like the “dignity of labour” no longer have resonance. 
Mass immigration has been part of the answer in recent decades, but if that is going to be a bit harder after Brexit, as it should be, then employers are going to have to make their basic jobs more attractive and better paid, or invest more in laboursaving equipment (which would be good for productivity). In return, it is not unreasonable for employers to expect our schools to produce kids, at all levels, with basic literacy and numeracy. 
Communities are not dead - just ask the surfer dudes
Fistral Beach, Cornwall  Credit: Matt Cardy
I had hoped that at least one of my sons would be a keen cricketer. It was not to be. But both of them have ended up excelling at niche sports: one at ultimate Frisbee, the other at surfing.  Through my surfer son I have come to see how communitarians like Geoff Dench may have been too pessimistic about modern communities. “Given” communities of family, neighbourhood, nation, might be weakening, but many chosen communities, like the Bude (North Cornwall) surfer network, reinforced by the connectivity of social media, are thriving.  When, a few days ago, my son had his beloved surf board stolen – it was left beside a runway at the disused Davidstow airstrip while I gave him a driving lesson – the sense of outrage felt by his fellow surfer dudes helped to soften the pain of loss.  But my son also tells me that the warm and fuzzy openness of the online surfer community is not the only story. Like any community worthy of the name, it is also has well-defined boundaries and clear hierarchies where it really counts: in the sea. You will not be welcome if you turn up unannounced at one of the local semi-secret surfing spots and even less welcome if you steal the wave of a clan elder.
How do we cut illegal immigration? By policing Britain's internal border
Britain is a country that wants to remain open but does not want its population to change too fast. It is a delicate balancing act for the UK border infrastructure. And despite the refrain of being “not fit for purpose” – either too laissez faire for not deporting enough illegal immigrants, or too draconian for harassing legitimate residents caught up in the Windrush scandal – we are edging in the right direction.
It is seldom recognised that most of our immigration is now temporary, mainly students and workers who return home. Annual net immigration is running at over 250,000 a year but the number granted permanent residence (excluding EU citizens) is just 60,000 a year. If the Government had taken permanent residence as the annual “tens of thousands” target rather than net immigration it would have comfortably met it.
In any case, having spent months talking to dozens of people from top to bottom of the Home Office for a report published tomorrow for the think tank, Policy Exchange, I come away reassured that the border is working far better than 10 years ago. The visa flows (there are 2.6m visas granted every year) are under tighter control; since 2008 more than 1m non-EU citizens have happily used a Biometric Residence Permit (an ID card) to regulate their rights; the UK is a world leader in E-gates helping to keep queues down; exit checks of a kind have been reinstalled; the number of new illegal immigrants is rising at its lowest level for two decades (just 15,000 to 20,000 a year in my calculation). After the surge in newcomers after Labour’s 1997 victory, and then after 2004 with the East Europeans joining the EU, the system was overwhelmed. This is no longer the case, thanks in part to the controls introduced by Theresa May as home secretary.
The Windrush scandal was an error of over-zealous control, and my report has suggestions for avoiding a repeat of this egregious mistake, but Windrush must not lead to a radical watering down of the so-called “hostile environment”.
For the correct term for the hostile environment is simply the internal border. In a country like Britain with tens of millions of annual arrivals, most without the right to stay or work (a number that will rise after Brexit to include EU citizens) not having strict internal controls – sub-contracted in part to employers, landlords, public service staff and so on – is equivalent to not having a border at all.
For various reasons to do with the lack of ID cards, the English language and an open labour market, the UK has long been a magnet for illegals, and there are probably at least 500,000 in the country now. And if we want to stop this number creeping ever higher a national ID system for both temporary immigrants and citizens is the long-term answer. Putting this back on the agenda is the one good thing to come out of Windrush.
In the meantime, Sajid Javid, the Home Secretary, needs to get on to the front foot and not allow his agenda to be set by anti-border ideologues exploiting Windrush. Illegal immigration is corrosive. It makes inner-city Britain less law abiding and most negatively impacts recent legal immigrants. Action against it should be more confidently linked to minimum wage enforcement, private landlord licensing and action against modern slavery.
We can deport more people (only 6,000 people left involuntarily last year, excluding prisoners) but that is not the only way to reduce the illegal population. A general amnesty is undesirable but we should consider regularising those who have been here, living in the mainstream, for more than 10 years (rather than 20 as at present).
And why not pay people more to leave? It costs 10 times more to remove an illegal against their will than to persuade someone to go voluntarily. And could that swollen foreign aid budget not play a role here, subsidising enterprising illegals to set up businesses in their home countries?
This is the era not of the abolition of borders but of the smart, digital border. Just 0.3 per cent of public spending goes on the border function but even after Brexit numbers will continue rising and they will require more monitoring not less. To achieve the balance we all want between smooth flows across the border and protection from threats to our security, whether terrorists or illegal workers, we need more investment, continuing reform and cooperation from civil society in managing that unavoidable internal border.
how my Lehman brothers ancestors shaped America
 
The National Theatre’s new Lehman Trilogy, which has just opened, is a morality tale about the past 150 years of US capitalism as told through the story of the German Jewish immigrant Lehman family and the bank that became synonymous with the 2007-8 financial crisis. The play, like the banking dynasty, is highly innovative but rather runs out of steam. Nevertheless, it still had me gripped for most of its 3½ hours because a central character is my great-great-grandfather, Mayer Lehman, one of the three brothers who founded the original business in Montgomery, Alabama, in the mid-19th century.
You can’t blame me or my relatives for the crash, however, for there was no family involvement in the bank after 1969 when Bobby Lehman, grandson of another founding brother, Emanuel, died. By 1984 the original investment bank had been sold to American Express. The bank did become independent again in 1994 and its boss at the time of the crash, Dick Fuld, had first joined the bank’s new trading arm at the end of the Bobby Lehman era.
Yet if family responsibility for 2007-8 is minimal, are we entitled, conversely, to feel pride in the achievements of the three brothers and their immediate descendants? My wing of the family is descended from Mayer’s grandson Arthur Goodhart (my grandfather), who escaped the claustrophobic world of New York’s German Jews just before the First World War to study law at Cambridge and marry a gentile Englishwoman.
So we are British, not Jewish, and growing up I was only dimly aware of being connected to some very rich Americans whose money seemed to subsidise our privileged world of private schools and skiing holidays.
Nevertheless, it now certainly feels like some vicarious, undeserved honour to be connected to such an extraordinary family history — albeit rather distantly; one that is both an emblematic “American dream” immigrant success story but also encompasses slavery, anti-semitism and a little-known but intensely principled US politician, Mayer’s son Herbert Lehman.
I also feel an extra Lehman connection via Germany. I spent three years there reporting for the Financial Times during the unification period and in 1996 attended a commemoration of the 150th anniversary of the three brothers’ journey from their home in Rimpar, a small town in northern Bavaria.
When the first brother, Henry, left for America in 1844, Bavaria still imposed quite severe restrictions on where Jews could live and work. America represented freedom. This is not, however, a rags-to-riches story. It is true that when Henry joined fellow Jews in Montgomery, Alabama, life was initially tough and he worked as a travelling shopkeeper peddling goods around the cotton plantations. But back in Rimpar his father, Abraham, had been a successful cattle dealer and wine merchant and all three brothers were well educated.
The nearest modern equivalent is perhaps with the east African Asians, many of whom arrived in Britain in the early 1970s with little money but with cultural capital and entrepreneurial know-how.
The Lehman brothers — Henry was joined by Emanuel in 1847 and Mayer in 1850 — were welcomed in Alabama, where white Europeans were heavily outnumbered by African slaves. They repaid this welcome by becoming Confederate patriots during and after the Civil War. And as the shopkeepers prospered and grew into successful cotton brokers they also became household slave owners.
Questioning slavery, as Roland Flade, historian of the Lehmans, points out, was not an option if they wanted to be accepted in Alabama. He also observes that they were evidently decent enough masters, as two of Mayer’s seven slaves moved north to New York with the family after liberation. Nevertheless the Lehman history is a useful reminder that people who are oppressed in one context can become oppressors in another.
 
Herbert Lehman meets John F Kennedy, then a senator, in 1960
The Lehman story then switches to New York and to three generations, and almost 100 years, of financial inventiveness and success. The two remaining brothers (Henry had died of yellow fever in 1855) helped to establish the New York cotton exchange in 1870 but branched out into sugar, coffee, tobacco, oil and increasingly into banking itself.
They were not alone. As Wall Street grew and trading in stocks and bonds expanded in the booming decades after the Civil War, a remarkable group of German Jewish families, immortalised in the book Our Crowd, pioneered everything from commercial paper to futures markets — Loebs, Schiffs, Goldmans, Sachses, Seligmans, Warburgs, Kuhns, Guggenheims, Strauses and so on.
Established banks such as JP Morgan tended to finance the big “robber baron” companies in the late 19th century and it was left to the outsiders to back the riskier upstart companies. “Let the Jews have that one,” is said to have been a common cry on Wall Street.
Lehman Brothers investment bank was behind innovative retailers such as Sears, Roebuck and Woolworths and later on it backed several Hollywood studios (King Kong and Gone with the Wind were Lehman movies), and was there at the birth of television and the Pan Am and TWA airlines.
Although this creativity curdles into Fuld’s subprime crisis of 2008 the play captures some of the romance of commerce and financial innovation — the outsider middle men who ended up directing a large slice of American capitalism.
What it doesn’t capture so well is how separately the German Jews lived. Jews may have had equal rights in America from the start but they were not socially embraced. In New York the German Jews had their own club (the Harmonie) and their own Temple Emanu-El and schools.
Some of this separateness dissolved as subsequent generations, like the more refined children of the rough Yorkshire mill owners, moved into the worlds of politics and the arts. Bobby Lehman’s art collection today forms a wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Mayer’s son Herbert became one of Franklin D Roosevelt’s closest allies, replacing him as governor of New York state when FDR became president in 1933.
Herbert was a liberal Democrat and later a New York senator who stood up to Senator Joseph McCarthy and, even more impressively, jeopardised his friendship with FDR by opposing his attempt to “pack” the Supreme Court. (He also, through the Mayer Lehman Charity Fund, rescued dozens of relatives and non-relatives from Germany in the late 1930s.)
Herbert, partly raised by a nanny who had been a slave, was a director of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People and was thus an emblem of the Jewish-black civil rights coalition that fell apart amid much recrimination in the late 1960s.
When the original Lehman Brothers investment bank ran into trouble in the 1980s and was sold to American Express, it was partly because of a culture clash between the “bankers” and the “traders” representing different generations of New York Jewish immigrants: Germans versus east Europeans.
The patrician German bankers, now hardly Jewish at all, came to epitomise the thesis of Yuri Slezkine’s book The Jewish Century — the outsiders had become the ultimate insiders. For good and ill, the cattle traders from Rimpar had reshaped America in their own image.
Nation has united behind Southgate's modern team - and ended hostility towards Englishness
I took my two sons to the World Cup in Germany in 2006, where we had to watch the third penalty shoot-out defeat in major competitions since 1990. Then, the talk was of moderate German nationalism being “normalised” by all the flag-waving.
But deep patterns of political behaviour are not changed by single events, and German politics – see Angela Merkel’s extraordinary decision in the refugee crisis – cannot so easily discard history and claim normal nation status.
Does this World Cup represent a normalisation of Englishness? The simple answer is no, because it is already normal.
The English flag has been widely used at sporting occasions since 1996, and most English people now identify as English (and most British, too) in response to the lesson in UK multi-nationality provided by Scottish nationalism over the past 20 years. You do not need a parliament and political institutions to be a normal nation. But there is, nonetheless, some significance in the current manifestation of English national allegiance.
In the same way that Danny Boyle’s 2012 Olympic show reflected how our British national story had evolved into something open and post-chauvinistic, grounded in a sense of specialness not imperial superiority, Gareth Southgate’s team may be doing something similar for the English national story. 
What is most striking about the England squad is how provincial it is, from urban but not metropolitan England
The England manager himself said as much in his press conference on Tuesday when he acknowledged that an English victory could help heal divisions. "Our country has been through difficult experiences in terms of unity," he said. "And sport, football in particular, has the power to help that. It is a special feeling and a privilege for us."
There are two reasons why even liberal-minded English people (and a few Celts) can get behind this team. First, it looks like modern urban England, with 11 out of 23 players from Caribbean, African or mixed-race backgrounds, and this has long since ceased to be novel.
It is, in fact, not right to say, as several commentators have, that the squad “looks like the country we’ve become”. The black and mixed race population of the country is only about 6 per cent compared with almost half of the squad.
Gareth Southgate: An English victory could help heal divisions in society Credit:  Antonio Calanni/AP
What is most striking about the squad is how provincial it is, from urban but not metropolitan England: Sheffield, Bury, Bradford, Doncaster, Stevenage, Cheltenham, Bristol, with just two born in London (Kane and Loftus-Cheek). Fifteen out of the 23 are northerners, and six from Yorkshire.
And, as has been widely noted, a good portion of the squad have served apprenticeships in unfashionable clubs like Sheffield United, Watford, Peterborough and Leeds. I heard a BBC phone-in after the victory over Sweden, and a large number of the callers claimed to have had some contact, or knew someone who had, with one of the players.
The second reason is the way the squad, the fans and the manager have behaved. Apart from one trashed Ikea store, the fans both here and in Russia have not been violent and menacing, the players and their wives and girlfriends have not been boorish and spoiled, and waistcoated Gareth Southgate has been a gentlemanly and articulate spokesman.
It is striking how few England flags are flying in London, signifying how post-English it has become
He has even ventured into reflections on sport and national identity: “We’re a team, with our diversity and our youth, that represents modern England […]. In England, we have spent a bit of time being a bit lost as to what our modern identity is. I think as a team we represent that modern identity and, hopefully, people can connect with us.”
He is right this is a melting-pot team and several of the white players, including captain Kane, are from Irish backgrounds – but it also speaks to white, post-industrial, left-behind places, like Barnsley (John Stones) which are not usually thought of as “modern”.
Indeed, London, the apotheosis of English modernity is having a quieter World Cup than provincial England. It is striking how few England flags are flying in London, signifying how post-English it has become. I even had my England car flag ripped off in Dollis Hill, which is entirely flag-free. A friend of mine who runs an inner-city London secondary school found that many of the mainly ethnic minority pupils were supporting teams other than England, even though Raheem Sterling grew up around the corner.
A taxi was damaged after fans celebrated in Nottingham after England's win in the World Cup quarter-final Credit: Dan Westwell
Could this England World Cup run make a dent in that indifference or even hostility towards Englishness? Most ethnic minorities have in the past tended to identify as British, seeing English as a white identity, but that has been slowly eroding in recent decades. A successful, almost half-black England World Cup team could speed up that switch.
Decent national sentiment is reinforced by what the American Bonnie Honig calls “objects of public love” – such as the NHS and maybe this England football team. These objects of public love make us feel connected to a joint endeavour and allow us, at least temporarily, to set aside our differences and conflicts.
It may not last long: after all, the euphoria of the 2012 Olympics was followed not long after by the Brexit vote of 2016. Yet, as the political class strains to come up with a form of Brexit that most of the country can unite behind, this celebration of a decent England team, both on and off the pitch, could not have come at a better time.
Questioning diversity
 : I do not think the essay was ‘notorious’! It was an honest attempt to grapple with a real issue. Yes the essay was a kind of warning to the left saying that the two principles that you attach the greatest importance to, diversity and solidarity, are necessarily in tension – at least if you accept the common-sense assumption that people are readier to share with people they feel familiar with and with whom they share norms of behaviour.
The essay was written at the end of 2003 and caused quite a controversy when it was reprinted in the Guardian newspaper, the main paper of the centre-left. It was written before the jihadist 7/7 attacks in London or the big inflow of workers from central and eastern Europe after the accession of the ex-communist countries in 2004, both of which have given an extra twist to this ‘progressive dilemma.’
I think the underlying tension I describe is central to modern politics and I have, as you imply, returned to it in a somewhat different form in the Anywhere-Somewhere value divide. But the tension has not manifested itself, at least not yet, in the manner I predicted of declining support for the welfare state. In continental Europe that is partly because a lot of welfare is managed through quite individualised compulsory insurance systems. In the UK there is a more common-pool welfare system based on general taxation which is therefore vulnerable to declining feelings of common identity with fellow citizens.
And I think there is some evidence of this decline in the UK: we have seen the introduction here of policies such as household welfare caps and child benefit to be paid in future to just two children. The fact that free movement gives European newcomers immediate access to all aspects of the social state has also been a factor behind the Brexit vote. And I suspect UK welfare will shift closer towards the continental insurance model over time to help mitigate the solidarity/diversity tension.
But overall social security spending is holding up for now, including in the UK. One reason is that relatively high levels of public spending may be one surviving element of the ‘progressive coalition’ between the liberal middle class (especially those that work in the public sector) and the working class. Another reason is the sheer tenacity of the state in resisting attempts to cut it back.
What has emerged much more strongly than I predicted is the force of the political reaction against diversity and mass immigration: clearly one of the main factors behind Brexit, Trump and populism in Europe is a muted form of white identity politics. And I do not think this will go away, I think it is a matter of channelling it in a benign direction.
The fundamental diversity/solidarity divide I pointed to in that essay is also of course reflected in the Anywhere/Somewhere value divide, indeed it is the central divide in the western political soul, maybe even in the human soul itself. It is expressed in many different ways : rights versus duties, freedom versus security, globalism versus nationalism, mobility versus roots.
The first term in all those couplets has had an exceptional run in the past couple of liberal decades and it is time for a bit of rebalancing.
It is not very gracious to say ‘I told you so’! But yes I do think I spotted a widespread discomfort with the dominant Anywhere liberalism, a discomfort that is as much cultural as economic. Anywheres have been too oblivious to their own power. They have ruled in their own interest and called it the national interest. And this is not just about economic policy and the shift to an open, high-immigration, knowledge economy which benefits Anywheres and often disadvantages Somewheres. Almost the entire political-policy spectrum is dominated by secular, liberal Anywhere assumptions, at least in the UK: the huge expansion of higher education and relative neglect of technical and vocational education; the way in which cognitive ability has become the gold standard of human esteem; the way in which many forms of group attachment (national, local, ethnic) have become suspect; the declining importance of the private realm and the attempts to minimize gender differences and gender roles that many people still value. And then on top of this the Somewheres have been told that the Anywhere worldview is morally superior to their own.
Yes, of course; I have already used the terms a few times, but let me define them more clearly. The main value divide in our society is between the 20 to 25 per cent of the population I call the Anywheres (the people who see the world from Anywhere), who are well educated and mobile and tend to favour openness, autonomy, fluidity – and a larger group of people (about 50 per cent of the population) I call the Somewheres (the people who see the world from Somewhere), who are less well educated, more rooted and value security/familiarity, and place a much greater emphasis on group attachments (local, ethnic, national) than the Anywheres.
Anywheres are generally comfortable with social change because they have so-called ‘achieved identities’ a sense of yourself derived from your educational and career achievements which allows you to fit in pretty much anywhere. Whereas Somewheres have ’ascribed identities’ based more on place or group which means that your identity can be more easily discomforted by rapid social change.
This sounds like a very binary distinction but there is a big in-betweener group of about 25 per cent of the population and there is a great variety of both Anywheres and Somewheres. It is important to remember that Anywheres are not just the metropolitan or cosmopolitan elites; they are around one quarter of the population and many of them have quite mainstream lives and beliefs. Though there is a sub-set of more extreme Anywheres I call the Global Villagers (about 5 per cent of the population) and there is also a group of more extreme Somewheres I call Hard Authoritarians (about 5 to 7 per cent of the population).
It is important to note that I have invented the labels but I have not invented the value groups. The divides play out somewhat differently in different countries, and they are fuzzy at the edges and change over time but in the UK they are plainly there to see in the opinion and value surveys such as the British Social Attitudes Survey. The differences overlap to some extent with social class but are distinct.
Why has the divide emerged so strongly in recent times? First, the greater importance of socio-cultural politics. Socio-economic politics and the old left/right division remain important but are increasingly eclipsed by the ‘security and identity’ issues. Second, the rapid growth in the number of Anywheres, driven by the expansion of higher education, has unbalanced the system. Anywheres have become too dominant as I argued above. All the main political parties (apart from the populists) are dominated by Anywhere priorities and assumptions and most of the policy agenda too, at least in Britain.
Populism is the reaction to liberal Anywhere overreach. Most but not all of those who voted for Brexit are probably best described as Somewheres. The task of politics in the next generation is to find a new settlement between these two legitimate worldviews, the two halves of humanity’s political soul.
In the UK the Anywhere/Somewhere divide is particularly acute because of residential universities and the dominance of London. Young people who do well at school, from whatever class background, usually leave home to go to college and if they are pursuing upper professional careers might well then move to London or another metropolitan centre. They lose touch with their school friends and create new professional networks. But yes, you are right they will often settle and create new kinds of roots, perhaps in the middle class quarters near a university. And yes, it is possible to imagine a Somewhere as you describe. Not everyone fits neatly into these meta-categories. Everyone is idiosyncratic.
I am an Anywhere with Somewhere sympathies.
Haha! No, that is a kind of Anywhere arrogance that drives the Somewheres mad! Educated people are no more objective than uneducated people. I do not mean the scientists or doctors; obviously they have hard, objective knowledge. But the academics, journalists, commentators or just opinionated professional people are no more neutral than Joe Public. When it comes to views about politics and society even the highly educated start from their own values and priorities. They do not come to their opinions from a neutral survey of the social science journals, though they may find such journals useful to find facts to support the arguments they already feel drawn to.
I think most Somewheres are discomforted by rapid social change and therefore have a bias against large-scale immigration, often for economic reasons too. Liberals tend to unfairly describe Somewheres as anti-immigrant, but in most cases that is not the case. And yes, I often make the point that ethnic minorities are a potential bridge between the two value groups. They are in the country in part because of Anywhere openness and they often retain more international connections than the native population but their religiosity, strong families and social conservatism gives them a more Somewhere worldview.
There is still quite a strong consensus in Britain in favour of a regulated market economy with, by historical standards, a pretty substantial state (the political argument is essentially between a state taking 38 per cent of GDP and one taking 42 per cent of GDP) and with a public realm with a strongly egalitarian and liberal ethos. If anything there has been a convergence between classes on socio-economic issues in recent decades, the divergence is over culture, openness and sovereignty.
It is worth unpacking the national sovereignty argument here. Liberal writers like Ivan Krastev and Yascha Mounk have developed this idea of the two parts of the phrase liberal democracy increasingly being at war with each other. They have invented a new sort of triangulation in which they attack the elites for becoming undemocratic and the populists for becoming illiberal. I think there is more evidence for the first than the second.
What do I mean by that ? I think the key concept here, especially in the European context, is what the British former civil servant Ivan Rogers has called technocratic depoliticization.
At the European and indeed the global level technocratic elites tend to agree that we can no longer be effectively governed at the national or local level and are happy to pool sovereignty to make markets and politics work better in a more interdependent world. And that means removing more and more things from the democratic contest. This is not just about majority voting in the EU or WTO regulations it is also true of domestic politics: think of independent central banks or the much greater legal activism of the judiciary in the era of human rights legislation with its deep hostility to majoritarianism.
Now all of these things that shrink the democratic space may be entirely justified in their own terms. But you can bet your bottom dollar that when things are removed from the national democratic arena they will inevitably be decided according to those Anywhere priorities of openness, diversity and so on.
Moreover, at a personal-psychological level the Anywheres, especially in the higher elite, are comfortable with relinquishing sovereignty. They understand the trade-offs, the benefits to be gained in GDP growth or greater cooperation to combat climate change, they may even have a friend of a friend who works at one of the international organisations. They also tend to have quite a high degree of sovereignty in their own personal and professional lives so don’t really feel the loss of it associated with the shrinkage of national citizenship.
So the problem is that Anywhere politics is tending to hollow out national democracy which is experienced as empowering by elites and disempowering by non-elites. And this diluting of democracy can lead to populist-rejectionist responses.
As Ivan Rogers has written: ‘If you evacuate many domains of public policy of any real element of choice at the citizen level… then the only way to voice opposition become to voice opposition to the whole system and to argue that it needs to be demolished rather than changed from within.’
So illiberal democracy is the product of elite-led undemocratic liberalism or what I would call liberal Anywhere over-reach. And yes, some of the opposition to this political evolution has been authoritarian and xenophobic, reflecting the views of anything between 2 and 10 per cent of the population. But the rise of illiberal democracy has been exaggerated. The rise in support for populist parties, many of which have actually participated in coalition governments around Europe, has not, thankfully, led to any significant change in the liberal-constitutional consensus. There has been no consistent attempt to undermine minority rights or subvert the rule of law. Immigration continues at quite high levels and the initial response to the refugee crisis of 2015 was a welcome one, even if it did subsequently sour.
The proponents of illiberal democracy can point to some worrying developments in Poland and Hungary but that is a product of the unique post-communist history of central and eastern Europe. It’s true there was the burkini ban, but that fizzled out into a farce. The Swiss have banned new minarets but that is a minor inconvenience to Swiss Muslims.
So, there has been some polarization as some Somewheres have found a political voice in populist parties but I do not think that illiberal democracy is sweeping across Europe.
One of the reasons illiberal democracy has been largely held at bay, at least so far, is because most Somewheres and many populist voters have a political worldview that I call decent populism. What that means, in a nutshell, is that most Somewheres (at least those under retirement age) have accepted what I call ‘the great rights liberalisation’ of the last 40 years on race, gender and sexuality.
They are, in the main, modern people but they are not liberals. As I have already described, their identities are often strongly rooted in the places and groups they come from and for that reason they often find change to those places – or indeed the country as a whole – discomforting. They often see change as loss and for that reason tend to be hostile to mass immigration, though (to repeat) usually not to individual immigrants. They feel strongly about people, especially newcomers to a country, conforming to common norms (some have a high attachment to order). They are sensitive to welfare free-riding, put security before liberty and still believe in some kind of gender division of labour.
They are comfortable enough in the modern world but do not embrace the two ‘masses’ that have had such an impact on it: mass higher education and mass immigration.
Because Anywhere politicians and commentators do not understand socio-cultural politics in the way that they understand the utility maximising of socio-economic politics they are inclined to caricature Somewhere responses. It is true that open versus closed has in some respects become the new left versus right, but it is a very self-serving dualism for pro-openness Anywheres. Have you ever met anyone who wants to live in a closed society? But many Somewheres feel with good reason that the forms of openness that have emerged in the past 20 to 30 years do not always benefit them.
Anywhere liberalism underestimates or misunderstands decent populism. Liberalism tends to see group attachment and modern equality as incompatible or in active conflict. But attachment to an in-group – national, local, ethnic, etc. – does not require hostility to an out-group, and usually in the modern world can sit happily alongside an instinct of equality towards the stranger or outsider.
Reconciling these two groups is the central task of modern politics. Anywhere dominance cannot simply be replaced by Somewhere dominance. Anywheres represent some of the most progressive and dynamic forces in society but they have to show more emotional intelligence towards those who do not share their priorities and interests. Liberal Anywheres need to practice a bit more of the pluralism they talk about that means also making more effort to distinguish between the obviously unacceptable, illegitimate forms of populism – racist, anti-democratic groups like Golden Dawn in Greece – and more mainstream, legitimate forms like UKIP in the UK.
We need to find common interests and common enemies: we all have an interest in social and environmental stability, climate change is a common enemy.
They are not mutually exclusive but they are in tension; a tension that sensible politics can mitigate. I think that combination you describe is possible but only if cultural change is relatively gradual. And when ethnic majorities start shrinking rapidly, as we are seeing in many parts of America and some parts of Europe, you can get a white identity politics backlash, clearly one of the factors behind Trump.
Yes, some people are more equal to us than others. To think otherwise is quite inhuman. To value a stranger’s child as much as your own is a kind of madness. And if everyone is my brother then nobody is (not even my actual brother!) because my emotional and financial resources are spread too thin. Does anyone in Norway seriously think you should spend as much on development aid as you spend on health and welfare for Norwegians? Universalism interpreted as an equal obligation to all humans would be an abomination.
Mishra is ignorant of basic social facts. The last 20 years has seen more people raised out of poverty than ever before in human history. There has been an increase in inequality in both the countries where poverty has declined and in rich countries where the benefits of globalization have been unequally spread. But in most European countries the increase in inequality has been quite mild. In the UK for example there was a step change in the late 1980s but income inequality has stayed relatively steady since then and social security spending as a proportion of GDP continues to rise in most rich countries. Over the past 60 or 70 years the value of citizenship in a rich country has continued to rise as the social state has become more generous. And over the last 30 years the cost of transport from poor countries to rich ones has fallen. It is not surprising given those two things that more people from poor countries try to get into rich ones, and hence the bureaucracy of immigration and border control has had to grow. Why should poor people in rich countries make themselves poorer by allowing more open borders? It is not going to happen. The task is to make poor countries as much like rich ones as quickly possible. And in the meantime if rich countries out of misplaced moral conscience encourage too much brain drain of the new middle class from developing countries we merely slow down that process.
I think the value divide I describe is a reality in all developed countries, though of course it takes a different form in different countries. Norway has seen a rise in support for populism that is partly driven by Somewhere push-back against Anywhere liberalism.
Postliberalism absorbs much of modern liberalism but balances it with an appreciation of community, social stability and the obligations and duties that accompany our rights. It combines aspects of left and right. My own political credo echoes that of the American political scientist Daniel Bell who said he was a pro-market social democrat in economics, a liberal in politics and somewhat conservative in social and cultural matters. This is the hidden majority in most developed countries.
All politics is to some extent identity politics, my side against your side, my cause against your cause or your indifference. The civil rights movement in America was an expression of identity politics. But it was good identity politics, people outside the mainstream wanting to join it. It was a centripetal force, a bid to overcome past division and strengthen team America.
Today’s identity politics is different. It often reflects the concerns of the liberal Anywhere graduate class who often do not have the traditional grievances of the working class or excluded minorities. But left politics has historically been about grievance and changing society so grievances have to be found and are found. Campus identity politics also gives middle class youth who have often led very individualistic lives a taste of the pleasure of belonging.
So one can see the appeal. But I think it as a big problem for the left. The left, or any successful movement, needs to be centripetal to pull forces together to become hegemonic. But identity politics is by definition centrifugal, about division into niches of grievance.
And in this it reflects the fragmentation of the wider society, something that any reform politics has to set its face against. All the recent social and political trends have been centrifugal: the end of the Cold War removed the common enemy for western societies, immigration and diversity has tended to reduce trust and solidarity, the media once drew society together round the campfire with everyone watching the same programmes at the same time whereas now social media divides us and, indeed, has become one of the main channels through which identity politics thrives.
  on how to transform UK training - SDP
Training. What a turn-off. The very word casts a shadow over the page. That is partly because it has become such a specialised field, awash in hundreds of different programmes producing less and less of what we need as a society. Most policymakers don’t understand it, let alone citizens.
The Covid-19 crisis is a chance to change this. The economy is on the point of a great reshaping and if the state can pay the wages of millions it can support the retraining of millions.
Too much of our education/training spend now goes on 18-19 year olds in higher education doing full-time residential courses lasting three or four years, meaning we over-produce then grade-inflate too many bachelor degrees. One third of graduates are not in graduate jobs, while we suffer debilitating shortages in skilled trades, construction and middle-skill technician jobs (including the vital lab technicians we see on television).
People in policy circles talk endlessly about ‘lifelong learning’, yet adult education and re-education are in freefall and the apprenticeship system is not working for school leavers.
Here are three ideas for an emergency training package—aimed mainly at non-university bound school-leavers and adult retrainers.
First, an “opportunity grant” of £3,000 for every individual over 21, the money to be drawn down by the providers of approved job-relevant courses. Individuals cannot see the costs and benefits of different courses of action so need an official training map to describe available courses and their costs, the job opportunities after a course, the average pay for that skill etc. The Government could use the map to guide people to skill shortage areas and might offer higher grants for a coder or construction electrician.
Second, suspend the current apprenticeship levy and replace it with a simplified model focused on school leavers (less than 10 per cent now enter an apprenticeship) with Government and employers splitting the full cost 50:50. The current levy covers less than one third of the total cost, so employers have used it on discretionary training for older workers.
Government should also promote good training by employers via public procurement rules.
Third, current bail-out conditions provide Government with leverage to weed out weaker university courses and create a sub-set of ‘applied universities’, undoing the mistaken abolition of polytechnics in 1992. Many post-1992 universities are already largely vocational but Government should insist that they offer courses aimed at a wider range of students: 18 month/two year courses, part-time courses and so on.
The UK must remain a global centre of education and research; indeed it should look to develop even further in this direction, but not allow a global focus, especially in higher education, to distract us from sorting out the glaring problems in our own backyard.
It is in the national interest for Dominic Cummings to stay
It is hardly a revelation that Dominic Cummings has many enemies who believe he should be sacked for his alleged infringement of the lockdown rules. He has become a lightning conductor for the anger of a good slice of progressive Britain. They want revenge, above all for Brexit.
But the Cummings question raises another interesting question about what, if any, special privileges should be enjoyed by the people running the country on our behalf. There is a kind of hyper-democratic rancour abroad that refuses to contemplate that our rulers, at least while they are ruling, deserve some special treatment.
I do not know Mr Cummings personally (and voted Remain in the referendum). Even his fans concede that he can be erratic, and it is reassuring to see, in several decisions that the Government made before the crisis, that his influence is not as great as his enemies imagine. 
But he is obviously highly capable, science and data literate, and understands many of the failings of the government machine that have been revealed by the crisis (see his 2014 IPPR lecture, “The Hollow Men”). I think it is in the national interest that he stays.   
And his case surely sits in a defensible grey zone. Both he and his wife were ill with the virus, placing their child in a vulnerable position. Short of handing the child to social services, it is hard to see what course of action they could have taken but to fall back on family in Durham. And they were, according to reports, fortunate to have the space in Durham to isolate away from Mr Cummings’s parents in a separate cottage, safe in the knowledge they could now rely on family help. 
They applied human common sense, and their case is in a completely different category to Professor Neil Ferguson’s romantic liaison, or Catherine Calderwood, the former Scottish chief medical officer, who decided to visit her second home. Both of those breaches of lockdown were completely unforced.
In general, of course, the law should apply equally to all, and members of the ruling elite should avoid saying one thing and doing another. But there is also widespread agreement that our rulers, and by extension their closest advisers, are entitled to some special treatment. They are, after all, special people, even in democracies – perhaps especially in democracies – and have a very unusual and demanding job, which we want them to perform to the best of their abilities. 
Dominic Cummings outside his home in London
Boris Johnson clearly did not get normal treatment at St Thomas’ Hospital. Politicians have bodyguards and, to cite a more trivial example, their cars often have police escorts and sail through red lights to get ministers and their advisers to meetings on time. We do, and should, bend the rules for them. The question is, which actions sit legitimately in that ruler privilege zone and which do not? We decided, for example, a few years back, that awarding yourself overgenerous expenses did not (without telling them). 
There is an anti-elitist piety, often expressed by the academic or media branch of the same broad elite, that refuses to accept the specialness of rulers. I sometimes think that the combination of mass higher education and social media threatens to make society ungovernable. The broad elite is in revolt against the narrow elite. Everyone thinks they know better. 
We have seen this in freedom of information rules that make it difficult for ministers and officials to have honest conversations, pushing key decisions into private rabbit-holes. (Though it’s a shame the rules were not applied to the scientific advice being given to ministers, where open critique of the science from other scientists would have been useful.)
We want transparent, open government, but it has negative unintended consequences that need to be constrained. The transparency requirements of modern institutions encourage a performative, virtue-signalling political culture that makes it harder for people to identify as establishment insiders and come to reasonable compromises.
So it’s important that Mr Cummings stays. Even if his actions were technically outside the letter of the law – which is far from clear – there is, surely, an extreme circumstances loophole, and more broadly we need to cut our rulers (and their top advisers) some slack. 
 The virus. It’s almost certain that ethnic minorities are at greater risk. But we can’t yet know the full explanation.
 
The crisis brings us together, the crisis pulls us apart. The familiar distinctions of class and status and region and race have weakened, temporarily, as we all face the same extraordinary new conditions of life ushered in by Covid-19.
You might even say that it is a One Nation conservative crisis. It has reinforced the authority of the nation state and, in the furlough scheme, underlined the centrality of national social contracts. Borders, rootedness, the local, family life, have all loomed larger and helter-skelter globalism has been taken down a peg or two.
But it is also a crisis whose epicentre has been the public care economy, and the powerful ethos of the public sector professional has become even more assertive in recent weeks. The ethos is risk averse, moderately egalitarian, sees more public spending as the answer to almost every problem and blames society (and usually Conservatives) for all differences in life chances.
In the early days and weeks of the crisis, the conservative impulse seemed to dominate but, as the weeks have passed, and as the differential impact of the Coronavirus has become clearer, the public sector ethos has pushed back. We are now being invited to extend our sympathies not so much to people in general, and the old in particular, which is a unifying force, but to sub-sets of the population who may be suffering disproportionately, above all the key workers in the health front-line and elsewhere, poorer people and ethnic minorities.
This is not in itself divisive if some groups really are suffering disproportionately. And Covid does inevitably hold up a mirror to some of the uglier aspects of our society: the failure to invest for the future, the income and status inequality, the poor health and diets of many people on lower incomes.
But the fact that the virus is not only ageist, fattist and sexist but also, apparently, racist, has provoked a fresh wave of complaint about structural racism from anti-racism activists. Should this be taken seriously?
There are two separate questions to consider here.
First, is it really the case that ethnic minority citizens, or at least some of them, do have an elevated risk of catching and then dying from the virus?
Second, if they do, how should the causal weight be allocated between three big factors?
Genetic/medical: the fact that some minorities are significantly more likely to suffer from diabetes, hypertension and heart disease, and maybe vitamin D deficiency too, all of which are thought to increase the risk of death from the virus.
Cultural factors: the fact that minorities are more likely to live in multi-generational households and take part in collective religious rituals, at least prior to lockdown, which exposes them to a higher risk of catching the virus.
Social-demographic factors: the fact that most minorities live in high density urban areas (London in particular), that some groups are more likely to be in people facing jobs whether as a hospital doctor or a bus driver, and some groups are relatively poor and live in crowded accommodation.
So, first, what do we know about the elevated risk for minorities? The issue began to be raised at the end of March/early April as a result of the first wave of deaths among doctors, almost all of whom were non-white.
The Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre produced a survey that found one third of patients in intensive care were from non-white ethnic groups, compared with the UK population share of around 13 per cent.
The Institute for Fiscal Studies produced a report on May 1st finding that, after adjusting for various things, the death rate for people of black African descent was 3.5 times higher than for white British people, 1.7 times higher for black Caribbeans and 2.7 times higher for Pakistanis.
The Office for National Statistics chipped in on May 7th finding that the risk of death for black people was 1.9 times higher than for whites, and for Bangladeshi and Pakistani males was 1.8 times higher. (British Chinese women mysteriously have a lower death rate than the white British despite a higher likelihood of being more exposed to people who had been close to the epicentre of the virus.)
There clearly is an issue here, as the experience of the US also underlines. But to accurately measure ethnic minority risk, and how disproportionate it might be, is very hard. The IFS report was produced before the large number of deaths in care homes had been recorded, which are around 97 per cent white.
The raw numbers also have to be adjusted for many things, some of which pull in opposite directions. Minority populations tend to be younger which should mean lower numbers, but they are also much more likely to live in London, Birmingham and other big urban centres that have seen the majority of deaths (60 per cent of the black population of England and Wales live in London and 50 per cent of the Bangladeshi population, compared with just 8 per cent of the white British majority).
There is also a more basic fuzziness. Ethnicity is not recorded on death certificates, so the ONS says it uses the self-reported ethnicity of the deceased, but it is not clear how it gets hold of this. Although the official forms we fill in are always asking about ethnicity, the relevant authorities often do not have the data about minorities that they need because the Information Commissioner has ruled that ethnicity (unlike gender) is sensitive information, and therefore can only be used with permission of the individuals concerned, which is a bit tricky if they are dead.
We also do not know what proportion of the UK population is non-white: it was 13 per cent at the 2011 census but could now be 15 or 16 per cent.
Some elevated risk for some minorities seems almost certain, even if we cannot be at all certain about the extent of it. But what about the likely causes? The truth is that nobody can yet confidently allocate blame across those three factors of genetics, cultural and social factors.
That has not stopped many people and organisations—the TUC, the Runnymede Trust, the Guardian—confidently asserting that genetics and culture have little or no explanatory role and that poverty and “structural racism” is the main culprit. (Doreen Lawrence, who has just been appointed to lead the Labour Party inquiry into the subject, is unlikely to disagree.)
Poverty almost certainly does have some role to play. The ONS reports that males in low skill, elementary occupations are twice as likely to die as the wider working age population, but it is not clear whether that is because of greater likelihood of exposure because of the nature of their work, or because of underlying health vulnerabilities.
Black Africans (33 per cent) and black Caribbeans (27 per cent) are most likely to work in either the health service or a key worker job, with Indians (22 per cent) and the white British (21 per cent) coming next, some way ahead of Pakistanis, Bangladeshis and other whites (mainly east Europeans). But Pakistanis and Bangladeshis are far more likely to live in overcrowded accommodation (making it harder to isolate), 18 per cent and 30 per cent respectively in London, compared to just two per cent of white British households in London.
There is an extensive literature on the link between poor health and low income/status. Michael Marmot has written about the so-called social gradient, the idea that, as socio-economic status rises, so do health prospects and life expectancy.
His studies of Whitehall civil servants found a steadily rising gradient in the risk of heart disease as you go down the hierarchy. Men at the bottom were four times more likely to die, and less than a third of the gradient disappeared when factors such as smoking and cholesterol were factored out. This finding, which was also found to hold outside Whitehall, is based on the idea that low status in a hierarchy produces constant stress and anxiety—especially for men, who tend to derive more status from work than women—and this produces higher levels of cortisol, which damages the immune system.
The social gradient is colour blind but, if a high proportion of people in the lowest status jobs are non-white, then it will impact on them disproportionately. But for the structural racism claim to hold it would have to be shown that white discrimination is responsible for non-white people being held in those low status jobs.
Thirty or forty years ago that might have been the case. But today, the assumption that all minorities have a similar experience at the bottom of the pile (reinforced by the BAME acronym) is deeply anachronistic. Chinese, Indian and mixed race ethnic groups all earn on average more than the white British average, while the different black groups earn between 5 and 10 per cent below that average. The outliers at the bottom are Pakistanis (16.9 per cent below average) and Bangladeshis (20.2 per cent).
And the lagging ethnic groups are likely to catch up or overtake in the near future as all big minorities record higher university attendance than the white British and better performances, sometimes hugely better performances, in the secondary school Progress 8 scores (measuring pupil progress between 11 and 16).
Moreover, the highest social class ‘higher managerial and professional jobs’ (in the eight category social class schema for the UK) already has a slightly higher representation of ethnic minorities than white British. The idea of ethnic minority Brits being second class citizens who are only now being recognised for their work and sacrifice in the front line, the assumption behind the famous You Clap For Us Now video, is simply not consistent with this data on the relative openness of British society and visibility of minorities at all levels.
Low income/status, and its associated conditions, will surely play some role in the elevated risk to some minority groups as will pre-existing health vulnerabilities. According to Shikta Das, an epidemiologist at University College London, the top two local authorities for Covid deaths, Brent and Harrow, which are also heavily south Asian, are both in the top three local authorities for diabetes in the whole of the UK.
Obesity is likely to be a contributing factor too—doubling the Covid death rate for those in their fifties, according to new research from Edinburgh and Liverpool universities—and a serious curse in this country, especially at the bottom end of the income scale. And 73 per cent of England’s adult black population are overweight or obese, 10 percentage points more than the white British population.
All of these factors will be weighed up in the review that the Government first proposed in the middle of April and then gave more details about early in May, announcing that it would be led by the British Caribbean Kevin Fenton, who is Director of Health and Wellbeing at Public Health England.
He is due to report at the end of the month, and should probably apply the precautionary principle and recommend that some minority groups join the list of those who need to take special care. Some NHS trusts have already been taking such steps.
The response of the Government on this issue has, so far, been pretty sure-footed which may have something to do with the fact that both the cabinet and Number Ten itself has many more black and Asian faces than in the recent past, which means that there is less nervousness around race issues and therefore less deferring to the anti-racist activist world with its “race is purely a social construct” certainties.
Indeed, one of the ironies of the crisis, and the focus on minority risk, is that it has underlined just how much progress this country has made in recent years. Trevor Phillips, the former equalities commissioner, now owner of a data company, wrote a paper for Imperial College on the issue in late March and was in touch with Munira Mirza, Head of the Number Ten policy unit, before the issue surfaced in the media.
Our TV screens are graced with the BBC’s Faisal Islam interviewing Rishi Sunak almost every week. The crisis has revealed that 40 per cent of NHS consultants are non-white, and most are minority Brits.
Twenty or thirty years ago the argument between supporters of the structural racism claim on the one hand and representatives of government on the other hand would have had non-whites lined up on one side and whites on the other. Now the argument counts prominent minority voices in both camps.
On the structural racism side we have Sadiq Khan, and (among many others) three members of the House of Lords, Doreen Lawrence, Sayeeda Warsi and Simon Woolley, the latter two insisting in a Guardian article that we should “not overplay cultural and genetic factors”.
On the other side we have Munira Mirza, Tony Sewell, Trevor Phillips and others, saying that we should not jump to conclusions and be prepared to follow wherever the evidence takes us. This surely represents progress.
Let's use this crisis to tackle Britain's woeful skills shortage | The Spectator
 
Training. What a turn-off. The very word casts a shadow over the page. That is partly because it has become such a specialised field, awash in hundreds of different programmes producing less and less of what we need as a society. Most policy makers don’t understand it, let alone citizens.
The Covid-19 crisis is a chance to change this. The economy is on the point of a great reshaping and if the state can pay the wages of millions it can support the retraining of millions.
Too much of our education and training spend now goes on 18 and 19-year-olds in higher education doing full-time residential three or four year courses. This means we over-produce then grade-inflate too many bachelor degrees. One third of graduates are not in graduate jobs, while we suffer debilitating shortages in skilled trades, construction and middle-skill technician jobs (including the vital lab staff we see on our TVs). We talk endlessly about lifelong learning yet adult education and re-education are in freefall and the apprenticeship system is not working for school leavers.
Here are three ideas for an emergency training package, drawn from my new report for Policy Exchange, A Training Opportunity in the Crisis, aimed mainly at non-university bound school-leavers and adult retrainers. 
First, an 'opportunity grant' of £3,000 for every adult, the money to go direct to the providers of approved job-relevant courses. Individuals cannot see the costs and benefits of different courses of action so need an official training map to describe available courses and their costs, the job opportunities after a course and the average pay for that particular skill. The government could use the map to guide people to skill shortage areas and might offer higher grants for a coder or construction electrician.
Second, suspend the current apprenticeship levy and replace with a simplified model focused on school leavers (less than ten per cent now enter an apprenticeship) with government and employers splitting the full cost 50/50. The current levy covers less than one third of the total cost, so employers have used it on discretionary training for older workers. The government should also promote decent training via public procurement rules.
Third, current bail out conditions provide the government with leverage to weed out weaker university courses and create a sub-set of 'applied universities', undoing the mistake of abolishing polytechnics in 1992. Many post-1992 universities are already largely vocational but the government should insist that they offer courses aimed at a wider range of students: 18 month/two year courses, part-time, and so on. 
The UK must remain a global centre of education and research, indeed develop even further in this direction, but not allow a global focus, especially in higher education, to distract us from sorting out the glaring problems in our own backyard.
Trade, but Not so Free
 
A partial retreat from globalization will be a consequence of the coronavirus pandemic. A new approach to trade is required that combines a degree of openness with national control.
 
The coronavirus pandemic is a perfect metaphor for the perils of hyper-connection. But it merely draws attention to the already existing retreat from full-on free trade that has been gaining in support and legitimacy in recent years.
Democratic politics and national social contracts are asserting themselves against the laws of comparative advantage—which in any case turn out not to be quite as benign as many economics professors claim. This was brought home to me a few weeks ago, in the very early stages of the crisis, when I heard a very senior member of the British Conservative Party say that he was until recently an orthodox free trader/free marketeer but now regarded himself as an economic nationalist.
As Dani Rodrik, the Harvard international political economy professor and hyper-globalization critic, wrote recently in Project Syndicate: “Rather than putting the world on a significantly different trajectory, the crisis is likely to intensify and entrench already-existing trends… Hyper-globalization will remain on the defensive as nation-states reclaim policy space.”
World trade fell last year by 0.4 per cent. There has been no multilateral trade agreement since 1993. US President Donald Trump wants to bring back some of the US supply chain from China. And this is not a Trumpian eccentricity, most of the US political class is behind him here. It acknowledges that allowing China entry to the global market economy in the belief that it would transform politically (and become less mercantilist economically) is a gamble that failed. There has been technological decoupling too, the world will not end up on single global platforms.
Stock-Up and Re-Shore
Anxieties about climate change have moved up domestic and international agendas. This has created a bias towards localism, reduced travel, and a degree of self-sufficiency especially in food production, making life uncomfortable for unfettered free trade. China’s air quality has improved dramatically in the past few weeks as a result of measures to contain the coronavirus. And more generically Greta is asking whether you really need to eat strawberries in January?
The debate in much of the Western world is not so much about whether the crisis will hasten the partial retreat from liberal globalization that is already taken for granted, but rather what form the retreat will take in different places. Even such an advocate for liberal globalization as France’s President Emmanuel Macron, in a well-received speech to the French public on April 13, talked about “rebuilding France’s agricultural, industrial and technological independence” in the light of the various supply crises the country has experienced.
The response is likely to take two forms. First a focus on the lack of supply in critical areas during the crisis—medical supplies of various kinds (PPE clothing, virus testing materials, pharmaceuticals) and some food and energy essentials—which requires better stock-piling and some reserve capacity in just-in-time supply chains. Second, there is a more radical conversation taking place about strategic industries and re-shoring and the permanent renationalization of some supply chains, especially those dependent on a single country like China.
Diversifying Suppliers
The first is relatively uncontroversial and just a matter of good logistics. Almost all rich countries have been caught with a shortage of supplies of vital protective clothing and equipment for front-line staff. In many cases, they have turned to their manufacturers to adapt production lines. The same is true for some of the materials required for virus testing.
Many countries had acquired a sense of invulnerability over the recent globalizing decades and had lost the folk memory left by two world wars of the need to have security of supply. In the UK, the No Deal Brexit preparations had exposed the British state’s cavalier neglect of prudential housekeeping. Senior civil servants were warning the government that trading on WTO terms was expected to cause a shortage of NHS clinical supplies due to a customs check disruption of a minor administrative kind. This is something that should never have been allowed to happen in the first place, and the coronavirus crisis will presumably ensure that it never happens again.
Governments in the future may require companies to maintain slack in their supply chains and to diversify suppliers. Companies are likely to want to do these things anyway, but governments might choose to provide guidelines for companies as is the case in Switzerland. In the UK there have been longstanding concerns about the lack of oil and natural gas storage. These might also be extended to include vital rare earth minerals.
Limiting Dependence on Trade
The second set of ideas on strategic industries is more controversial and would require abandoning or adapting some of the state aid and anti-protectionism rules of the EU and even the WTO. Of course, nobody in the mainstream is arguing against maintaining high levels of international trade or in favor of radical self-sufficiency. (And some degree of self-sufficiency has always been permitted in farming and the defense sector.)
But when whole industries grind to a halt because of the lack of parts from China or Vietnam, and when many rich countries suddenly discover that they no longer have the capacity for mass vaccine manufacture, more profound questions about acceptable levels of protection for domestic supply in key sectors need to be asked.
In a country like the UK that might include questions about whether we need to maintain at least one volume steel producer? The UK imports a bit less than half its food—is that too much? Modern agriculture now depends on an array of chemicals and fertilizers—should Britain’s last potash mine in North Yorkshire be supported by the Government? What about our dependence on Huawei post-coronavirus crisis?
What Price for Home-Grown?
These are all legitimate questions and they feed into a wider skepticism about free trade that has been growing in strength in recent years. The critics argue that for all of the benefits of international trade, the neat theories of free trade and comparative advantage have been oversold. And they have a point. Free trade, as the economist John Maynard Keynes pointed out, only works if the people displaced from good jobs by imports get equally good jobs elsewhere in the economy. The election of Donald Trump is one kind of proof that this has not been happening.
Hold on, say the free traders. Of course there will be downward pressure on wages and job losses in the short run, but in the long run, the additional purchasing power we acquire from cheaper imports means we can buy other goods and services that will create equally good jobs elsewhere in the economy. Moreover, they say, when given the choice between protecting the Mid-West manufacturing plant and enjoying good quality, cheaper stuff in Walmart, people have voted with their wallets for the cheaper stuff.
But they have not been given a proper choice. Of course, people will always prefer cheaper goods but not at any price. If the choice was between slightly more expensive goods and services and the preservation, or more gradual decline, of a certain agricultural or industrial way of life they might well support such a deal. Indeed, they do so in the EU through the Common Agricultural Policy.
Economics’ Blind Spot
People are well aware that they are both producers and consumers. The end of production is not just consumption, as Adam Smith asserted, it is also about what sort of life you might have as a producer. This is one of those places where economics reveals its blind spot for culture and human beings in the round.
Research also suggests that much trade doesn’t follow any discernible pattern of comparative advantage. The UK economist Graham Gudgin has shown that for countries in North America and Western Europe, joining free trade agreements has caused slower, not faster growth in recent decades. Unlike comparative advantage in natural resources, which is better described as absolute advantage, comparative advantage in manufacturing systems is usually quite marginal.
Much of the comparative advantage of recent decades has been simply taking advantage of lower labor costs in poorer countries. Apple makes iPhones in China which does benefit US consumers and to some extent Chinese workers, but the main beneficiaries are probably Apple executives and shareholders. Bringing some of that production back to the US, even at the cost of slightly higher prices, would not, I suspect, be unpopular.
More National Resilience
In the 19th century, Britain did completely embrace free trade. As the workshop of the world, it was enormously to the country’s advantage to do so, and the British imported most of their food by the end of the 19th century. The result was that they nearly starved in two world wars.
To repeat, nobody sensible is arguing for self-sufficiency or anything like it, but almost everyone is now talking about more national resilience in supply chains and less dependence on China, particularly in technology. And isn’t the logic of comparative advantage to produce specialist monocultures in a world that values diversity in all things?
Most of the economics profession is very uncomfortable with this drift in the argument, but there are some economists and political economists like Dani Rodrik, Ha-Joon Chang, Barry Eichengreen and Robert Skidelsky who have long argued for more democratic caveats to free trade. Rodrik argues that where there is a national consensus about preserving some aspect of an economy or culture, for example French restrictions on Hollywood film imports, these should be allowed and not attract sanctions from international trade regulators.
And a new UK government that is serious about regional and industrial policy, and about shifting more high value economic activity northwards, is implicitly protectionist. It is not going to promote high-tech export industries in Hartlepool and then allow them to be wiped out by imports. It will either protect with subsidies or tariffs. Free trade theory does allow some such protection under the title infant industry protection, which is far preferable to senile industry protection, but EU state aid policy is not friendly to either.
The unlikely bedfellows of populism, environmentalism and technology are all pointing in the same direction—reshoring of some forms of production, a bit more self-sufficiency, more teleconferencing with people in other countries rather than immigration, all in all a retreat from the hyper-globalization of recent decades.
Mitigating the Costs of Free Trade
Free traders will not unreasonably point to some costs. It could mean a bit less growth. Global supply chains are a force for peace, and breaking them up could bring back inflationary pressures. It could also mean that the dramatic fall in poverty in poorer countries will slow or stop. Why not just try to mitigate the costs of free trade better? Subsidize the losers more intelligently? Or, the free trade skeptic might reply, why not prevent there being so many losers in the first place?
As Barry Eichengreen says, the problem with the global economy is not a lack of openness but a sense that “the nation state has fundamentally lost control of its destiny, surrendering to anonymous global forces.” And as Hans Kundnani put it in a recent issue of The Observer newspaper, it is time the UK government adjusted its rhetoric and stopped its paens of praise to free trade. Part of the point of Brexit is to put politics before economics, democratic legitimacy before economic growth.
Of course, we still want lots of trade and sustainable growth but at less cost to other things that people hold dear. A new rhetoric is needed that combines an appropriate level of openness with a sense of national control. An economic nationalism that liberals can feel comfortable with.
Pass the remote, there’s too much emotion on the news
 
I watched the BBC News at Ten last week and by the end felt emotionally drained and no better informed about anything than at 9.59pm. On too many nights, the news bulletins at 6pm and 10pm run along these tramlines: here’s something about Covid-19; here’s someone who died; here’s a sobbing relative or frontline hero telling you to stay at home, save lives and protect the NHS.
Yes, it’s a bleak and emotional period, and the BBC has an impossible job trying to please everyone at a time like this, but I feel an aching lack of authority, explanation and context, and a general infantilisation of the public discourse. Too much communication has become performative rather than informative.
Great events such as the one we are living through reveal things about us. The reaction to the death of Diana revealed a country that was more emotional and less stoic than most people expected. Watching the (mainly BBC) news and listening to the government’s public communications, I wonder whether we are living through a second Diana moment, only this time without the element of benign popular uprising.
I have only been dipping in and out of the television news, so my analysis is not comprehensive, but I have also been watching bulletins from Germany and France. Reassuringly, they are having the same arguments about PPE provision and testing (the latter in France, at least), but their coverage is far less relentlessly emotional.
There is a cocktail of factors behind the dismaying public face that Britain currently displays. First, the expressive, emotional public tone reflects real changes in popular temperament in recent decades and perhaps also a less middle-aged and macho public culture.
Second, probably like many Sunday Times readers, I stopped watching TV news regularly long ago, so coming back during this crisis has exposed me to trends in our media culture that have been evolving over years. There is the human-interest dumbing-down as the BBC strains to reach younger audiences presumed to have shorter attention spans (even though a growing proportion are graduates). There is the 24-hour news phenomenon, which has spread resources and analysis more thinly. There is the rise of the Jeremy Paxman-John Humphrys hyper-adversarial political journalism, more interested in embarrassing than explaining.
Third, in a multicultural society with diverse values, the BBC has an increasingly impossible job speaking to the whole country. It is aware that its own upper-middle-class centre-left bias is not the whole country, so it retreats to the lowest common denominators that we all can agree on. In this crisis, that amounts to: it’s all very sad, and dying is bad!
I think most of us want less monomaniacally depressive coverage and a spirit of concerned inquiry that sets trends and numbers in proper context.
Is the 100-plus frontline NHS staff deaths out of 600,000 patient-facing workers a lot or a little? How does it compare with elsewhere? The BBC could look at the experiences of countries such as Italy that might be coming our way, interrogate the different schools of thought among scientists and, while reporting criticism of the government where deserved, look behind the blockages and slow responses to identify the institutional factors that might lie behind them. Too much centralisation? Too little?
I have not, in the main, been a government-basher, but its communications strategy has contributed to the infantilisation of the public. There should have been more open admission of failures.
People know this is an impossible situation, and admissions of failure are a sign of strength, not weakness (see Emmanuel Macron and various German ministers). The robotic praising of the public for staying at home like good children should have been replaced with a more galvanising message, telling us how we can do something useful, even if it’s just to bash out a couple of face masks on an old sewing machine.
We don’t want false optimism but we would like to hear how the government and its experts are weighing up the various trade-offs for ending lockdown.
The emotionalisation of public discourse is sometimes put down to the feminisation of society, but what we are experiencing is more accurately (and gender-neutrally) attributed to what the American writer Matthew Crawford, in his new book Why We Drive, calls “safetyism”. To invoke safety is to claim the high ground of public-spiritedness, and it is difficult to argue for any course of action that might in the short term reduce human safety.
The feminist writer Louise Perry agrees: “The safetyism idea sounds right, and I’m sure it’s gendered to some degree, since women are more risk-averse, on average. But I wonder if low tolerance of premature death is a natural consequence of living in a very safe society, rather than the product of any particular ideology.”
Some of what we now need is just old-fashioned political leadership. Our leaders must cut through the fear and paralysis that results from our overemotional public conversation and set a course out of the lockdown that is measured — underpinned by data and arguments that we can all see. And the BBC can then report it calmly and rigorously, as in the olden days.
Remaking One Nation: The Future of Conservatism by Nick Timothy
 
This book is a timely manifesto for the leftish Conservatism that propelled the Tories to election victory in December and was confirmed in Rishi Sunak’s budget.
Nick Timothy is one of the intellectual architects of that big-state Conservatism and what now looks like the new centre ground of UK politics. It means less of the free market-social liberalism combination of the Blair-Cameron era and more of Timothy’s “communitarian correction”, a bit to the left economically and to the right culturally.
He also describes his own political roller-coaster ride. As Theresa May’s joint chief of staff when she became PM in 2016, there was almost as much interest in the “all-powerful” Timothy then as there is in Dominic Cummings today.
But as the main drafter of the Tories’ social democratic 2017 election manifesto, all about industrial policy and taming capitalist excess, Timothy was forced to resign after May lost her majority and his “dementia tax” proposal for adult care took some of the blame.
In a gripping introduction he gives his version of these events and describes something close to a nervous breakdown as his name was dragged through the mud after the election. And I doubt he will remain on May’s Christmas-card list as he shifts a chunk of the blame to her, painting her as a micro-manager with no core beliefs or intellectual confidence.
But Timothy, and the ideas in this book, laid the groundwork for December’s Tory majority and the Brexit-inspired pivot towards a new coalition and a new consensus, one less dominated by the priorities and assumptions of liberal graduates and affluent Southerners and more by less well-educated and less-affluent people from non-metropolitan Britain.
The book itself is not for the faint-hearted. At times it degenerates into the kind of policy list about everything wrong with Britain that left-of-centre think tanks churn out. But this son of a Birmingham steel worker combines to good effect knowledge of political theory and experience of daily politics.
He makes a useful distinction between “essential liberalism”, which we almost all sign up to, and the elite liberalism shared by most members of the governing class but not the general public: mass immigration, multiculturalism, a lightly regulated labour market, limited support for the family and the marketisation of many public services.
He is no reactionary and acknowledges the persistence of race discrimination and gender inequality but seethes over the “asymmetrical multiculturalism” that allows liberals to ignore the crisis in white working-class communities. And he argues that the anxiety many white people feel about loss of a stable way of life is not racist.
He is also acutely aware of the graduate brain-drain from working-class towns and the neglect of non-university post-school options, pointing out that 80 undergraduate degrees were awarded in 2015 for every higher technical qualification.
I am already persuaded by most of this analysis; indeed I wanted more detail on things like his critique of free trade, but I wonder how convincing the neutral will find it. And his “ultra-liberal” epithet for Liz Truss and other more free market Tories feels a bit sweeping.
Similarly, his famous May speech about citizens of the world being citizens of nowhere — which may have been indirectly inspired by my own distinction between Anywheres and Somewheres — could have made the point about elite commitment to national social contracts without offending so many people.
But this is an important book that describes the worldview that, for now, is running the country. What is missing is the more political drama of how Tories like Timothy came to take over the party and what the balance of forces between the different factions looks like. But as Timothy evidently still has another chapter of his own political career ahead of him that will have to wait for his memoirs.
Farewell free trade, and good riddance - UnHerd
 
The coronavirus pandemic is the perfect metaphor for the perils of hyper-connection. We no longer need the help of rats or fleas to spread disease — we can do it ourselves thanks to mass international travel and supply chains. And we are no longer self-sufficient when things go wrong. When a corona vaccine is eventually discovered, we will have to wait our turn in the queue as we no longer have a UK-based manufacturer. Talk of the need for de-globalisation seems suddenly to be everywhere.
The pandemic also illuminates a wider retreat from full-on free trade that has been gaining in support and legitimacy over recent years—everywhere, that is, apart from in the economics profession. Democratic politics and national social contracts are starting to assert themselves against the laws of comparative advantage — which in any case turn out not to be quite as benign as the economics professors claim. This was brought home to me a few days ago when I heard a very senior Tory say that he was, until recently, an orthodox free trader/free marketeer but now regarded himself as an economic nationalist.
He is not alone. World trade fell last year by 0.4%. There has been no multilateral trade agreement since 1993. Donald Trump wants to bring back some of the US supply chain from China. And this is not a Trumpian eccentricity, most of the US political class is behind him on this, acknowledging that allowing China entry to the global market economy in the belief that it would transform politically (and become less mercantilist economically) is a gamble that failed. There has been technological decoupling too, the world will not end up on single global platforms.

The ascent of climate change anxieties up domestic and international agendas is also making life uncomfortable for unfettered free trade, encouraging a bias towards localism, reduced travel and a degree of self-sufficiency. China’s air quality has improved dramatically in the past few weeks as a result of measures to contain the coronavirus. And more generically, Greta is asking whether you really need strawberries in March.
The truth is that the neat theories of free trade and comparative advantage have been oversold. Free trade, as Keynes pointed out, only works if the people displaced from good jobs by imports get equally good jobs elsewhere in the economy. The election of Donald Trump is one kind of proof that this has not been happening.
Hold on, say the free traders, of course there will be downward pressure on wages and job losses in the short run but, in the long run, the additional purchasing power we acquire from cheaper imports means we can buy other goods and services that will create equally good jobs elsewhere in the economy. Moreover, they say, when given the choice between protecting the Mid-West manufacturing plant and enjoying good quality, cheaper stuff in Walmart, people have voted with their wallets for the cheaper stuff.
But they have not been given a proper choice. Of course people would always prefer cheaper goods, but not at any price. If the choice was between slightly more expensive goods and services, and the preservation, or more gradual decline, of a certain agricultural or industrial way of life, they might well support such a deal. Indeed, they do so in the EU through the Common Agricultural Policy.

People are well aware that they are both producers and consumers. The end of production is not just consumption, as Adam Smith asserted, it is also about what sort of life you might have as a producer. This is one of those places where economics reveals its blindspot for culture and human beings in the round.
According to Keynes biographer Robert Skidelsky, most trade doesn’t follow any discernible pattern of comparative advantage, and Cambridge economist Graham Gudgin has shown that, for countries in North America and Western Europe, joining free trade agreements has caused slower — not faster — growth in recent decades. Unlike comparative advantage in natural resources, which is better described as absolute advantage, comparative advantage in manufacturing systems is usually quite marginal.
Much of the comparative advantage of recent decades has been achieved by simply taking advantage of lower labour costs in poorer countries. Apple makes iPhones in China, which does benefit US consumers, and to some extent Chinese workers, but the main beneficiaries are probably Apple executives and shareholders. Bringing some of that production back to the US, even at the cost of slightly higher prices, would not, I suspect, be unpopular.
The theory that free trade engenders a permanent peace has long ago been exposed as an empty dream, which is why national security and the threat of war (and pandemics) continue to provide justification for some degree of national protection. In the 19th century, Britain did completely embrace free trade. It was enormously to our advantage to do so, as the workshop of the world, and we imported most of our food by the end of the 19th century. The result was that we nearly starved in two world wars. After the Second World War, we did not make the same mistake; even with the enormous change in tastes and increase in food imports in recent decades, we still produce more than half of what we eat.

Nobody sensible is arguing for self-sufficiency or anything like it, though it might be a good idea to retain at least some national capacity in certain strategic areas like steel or nuclear power plants or, indeed, vaccine manufacture. And, after all, isn’t the logic of comparative advantage to produce specialist monocultures in a world that values diversity in all things.
But there are some economists and political economists such as Dani Rodrik, Ha-Joon Chang, Barry Eichengreen and Robert Skidelsky who are arguing, persuasively, that we need more democratic caveats to free trade. Rodrik argues that where there is a national consensus about preserving some aspect of an economy or culture, for example French restrictions on Hollywood film imports, these should be allowed and not attract sanctions from international trade regulators.
A UK government that is serious about regional and industrial policy, and shifting more high value economic activity towards the North, is implicitly protectionist. It is not going to promote high-tech export industries in Hartlepool and then allow them to be wiped out by imports. It will protect with either subsidies or tariffs. It is true that free trade theory does allow some such protection under the title ‘infant industry protection’, which is far preferable to senile industry protection, but EU state aid policy is not friendly to either.

The unlikely bedfellows of populism, environmentalism and technology are all pointing in the same direction — the reshoring of some forms of production, a bit more self-sufficiency, more teleconferencing with people in other countries rather than immigration, all in all a retreat from the hyper-globalisation of recent decades.
Free traders will, not unreasonably, point to the costs. It could mean a bit less growth, though neither the populists nor the greens will necessarily object. Global supply chains are, indeed, a force for peace and breaking them up could bring back inflationary pressures. It could also mean that the dramatic fall in poverty in poorer countries will slow or stop. So why not try to mitigate the costs of free trade better? Subsidise the losers more intelligently? Or, the free trade sceptic might reply, why not prevent there being so many losers in the first place?
As Barry Eichengreen says, the problem with the global economy is not a lack of openness, but a sense that “the nation state has fundamentally lost control of its destiny, surrendering to anonymous global forces”. And as Hans Kundnani put it in last week’s Observer: “it is time the UK Government adjusted its rhetoric and stopped its paeans of praise to free trade”. Part of the point of Brexit is to put politics before economics, democratic legitimacy before economic growth.
Of course, we still want lots of trade and sustainable growth but at less cost to other things that people hold dear. A new rhetoric is needed that combines an appropriate level of openness with a sense of national control. An economic nationalism that most liberals can feel comfortable with.
Why belonging matters so much, for good and bad
 
 
This is, to put it politely, a paradoxical book. That is partly intentional. David Lammy is reflecting on the need for, and blessing of, group belonging —including his own quest for African roots — while also warning about the dangers of it.
It is also a lament about political polarisation from one of the most polarising, Twitter-warrior, politicians of recent years who is proud to describe Tory politicians as worse than Nazis.
Ten years ago Lammy was a politician who, it was said, hadn’t quite lived up to early promise, after becoming MP for Tottenham aged 27. But after the 2011 riots, which began on his patch, he won acclaim for his critique of nihilistic gang culture and his impatience with people on his own side who thought fatherlessness (his own father left when he was 12) did not matter.
He wrote a book Out of the Ashes, a blend of ideas from Left and Right, in which he was brave enough to point to shortcomings in his own African-Caribbean community, especially the men. Then three things happened—Brexit, the Windrush scandal and Grenfell — which turned him into an angry tribune.
The book provides some explanation. In the case of Windrush and Grenfell (a friend of his wife died in the fire), it was partly his own direct connection to the events that inspired his justified anger. But becoming a social media star was a factor too. He boasts about his 700,000 Twitter followers being more than the daily circulation of many national newspapers. But what social media stars tend to forget is that the Twitter nation with its large number of opinionated crackpots is not the nation.
If you were expecting a forensic unpacking of the two dismaying events, Windrush and Grenfell, that made him a national figure you will be disappointed. He skates over them, simply blaming the racism of the white establishment. Meanwhile most of the policy passages in the book just recycle centre-Left platitudes.
When he does depart from the script — for example on how to give voice to English national feeling — he is worth listening to. The best section of the book is a sympathetic account of why people voted Brexit from a zealous Remainer MP who insists Brexit is driven by xenophobia.
David Lammy attends the Midsummer Party for The Old Vic (Dave Benett)
There is a place for angry tribunes and despite his sectarian turn there are still things to admire about the new Lammy. He has poked the liberal self-regard of Oxbridge and the Comic Relief luvvies. And a life spent crossing class and race boundaries provides good memoir material here, whether recalling “wetting himself” the first time he was stopped and searched or reflections on the decline of Peterborough.
There is one big absence: he says almost nothing about the tribalism that is most destructive to his own community, gang culture and knife crime among inner city black youth.
If Lammy attributes this too to white racism, he doesn’t tell us. We know that victims and perpetrators are disproportionately young black men, many barely out of childhood. It is a shame that he has so little to say about why. The man who once challenged the self-destructive disaffection of inner-city black youth now seems content merely to echo it. That feels like a defeat for the idea the book is trying to promote.
  on Priti Patel's immigration system
 
The post-Brexit shake-up to Britain's immigration system, unveiled today by Priti Patel, should be welcomed on the grounds of politics, economics – and general fairness.
I would go further. This new, points-based labour migration policy represents the re-establishment of a national social contract with the British workforce – a contract that was ripped up when we adopted an open-door policy to EU migrants.
The Government's new system is much fairer because it works on merit, not nationality. We will no longer be forced to discriminate against a migrant from, say, New Zealand, over a Slovenian who enjoys an unambiguous right to come here.
The new approach is democratically appropriate, too. It was for this sort of policy that many voted in the Brexit referendum of 2016, a sentiment that also may have swept Boris Johnson to his landslide election victory.
The post-Brexit shake-up to Britain's immigration system, unveiled today by Priti Patel, should be welcomed on the grounds of politics, economics – and general fairness
After three years of parliamentary dithering, British voters now understand that the Government actually responds to popular instruction. We may therefore avoid the alarming spikes in support for the far-Right parties that are currently flourishing in many parts of the EU.
Quite simply, the current immigration system has not been working – either for the country or the workforce. With only a few honourable exceptions, Britain's large employers have got away with murder over two decades.
With a huge pool of cheap EU labour now denied them, many will have to invest a bit more, train workers a bit more and even pay them a bit more.
And what's wrong with that?
Spending on workforce-training in Britain has fallen by 20 per cent since 2004, when we opened the doors to mass migration from the EU.
For almost two decades, the UK's employers have reflexively turned to well-trained and generally reliable Eastern European labour, avoiding the bother of training and inspiring British youngsters, many of whom – it has to be said – are more disposed to stay in bed than their European counterparts.
The new approach is democratically appropriate, too. It was for this sort of policy that many voted in the Brexit referendum of 2016, a sentiment that also may have swept Boris Johnson to his landslide election victory
Not only are big companies guilty of this – the professional middle classes have followed suit, employing Czechs and Poles as nannies and builders rather than selecting candidates from closer to home.
There is nothing disgraceful in doing so, of course. But it has come at a high price. Large employers have avoided investing in expensive technologies while a seemingly limitless pool of cheap EU labour has kept the economic show on the road.
This is one reason why Britain's productivity levels are so dismally low, and falling further. Countries with lower productivity than their competitors are doomed to become ever poorer.
It is true that – as Government ministers rarely tire of saying – Britain enjoys effective full employment. But this rosy picture conceals problems, particularly at the low-skilled and younger end of the workforce.
Our youth unemployment level is 11.7 per cent, lower than in Spain and in Italy, but higher than in Germany, which has a stellar record of bringing the young into the workforce with outstanding apprentice schemes.
In the 16-to-24 age group in the UK, there are 800,000 so-called 'Neets', young people who are not in any form of education, employment or training – a truly sobering figure, and too many are from ethnic minority backgrounds.
At that level, a range of workers in different industries will be able to come to Britain, provided they can earn further points for speaking English and have a job offer from a reputable employer
If Mr Johnson is to re-establish this crucial social contract with the labour force, he must speedily address this issue, offering incentives to British workers and employers.
Even though the EU's share of Britain's total workforce is a relatively modest 7 per cent nationally, it is fully 17 per cent in London. And the national figures disguise some areas of genuine concern. Certain sectors have become alarmingly dependent on EU labour – a third of workers in food manufacturing and a fifth in the hotel trade.
Little wonder, therefore, that big business has generally been so scathing about any measure to reduce its access to a vast pool of EU labour. Many scare stories have been spread about the potential impact of restricting EU labour, but middle- and higher-skilled workers will still be welcome in a new light-touch regime.
It is the employers of low-skilled foreign labour that will feel the pinch –and so they should.
For all that, it was sensible of the Government to follow advice from the Migration Advisory Committee and reduce the immigration salary threshold for skilled workers from £30,000 to £25,600.
If Mr Johnson is to re-establish this crucial social contract with the labour force, he must speedily address this issue, offering incentives to British workers and employers
At that level, a range of workers in different industries will be able to come to Britain, provided they can earn further points for speaking English and have a job offer from a reputable employer. Needless to say, it will still be important to keep a sharp eye on labour shortages, and ease the rules if industries begin to suffer.
But some of the objections are alarmist. For instance, only 4 per cent of nurses are from the EU, and the figure is roughly double that in the care services.
These are substantial numbers, of course, but over time such figures can be managed.
Meanwhile, the Labour Party has become effectively the party of uncontrolled mass immigration, in defiance of the beliefs of its former core voters.
Opinion polling over many years has shown that most people want proper control of our borders, which is hardly a radical demand.
It is true that immigration has dropped down the list of voters' priorities, but that is because of a general sense that the Government is preparing to take action to control it, especially since the Brexit referendum.
Diane Abbott, the Shadow Home Secretary, has already dismissed the Government's new policy by saying it is a meaningless soundbite and 'isn't an Australian points-based system'.
She's dead wrong in her first point: this is genuine reform, not sloganeering. But Miss Abbott is right in her second point.
This was never intended to be a copy of Australia's system.
The immigration policy Down Under is predicated on filling a vast, under-populated country.
Britain's policy, operating in an overcrowded island off the coast of an even more populous continent, is designed specifically to restore the contract with working people, to raise productivity and reduce the shaming number of economically inactive youths here.
By those measures it shall be judged, and my firm belief is that in time it will come to be seen as a great advance.
Could this be Germany's next Chancellor? - UnHerd
 
If you haven’t yet heard of the German politician Robert Habeck, you soon will do. Charismatic and gifted, with the sort of rock-star qualities lapped up by the media and younger voters, Habeck might end up as the most powerful individual in Europe.
Since he took control of the Greens in 2018, they have consolidated themselves as the main party of the centre-Left — and political home of the educated, professional class – making them the most likely coalition partner for the centre-right CDU/CSU in 2021. It is quite conceivable, if the Greens were to end up as the largest party after those federal elections, that Habeck—or even his co-leader Annalena Baerbock — could wear the German Chancellor’s crown
He certainly had an adoring audience of elite young Germans at the LSE, where I saw him speaking last week. The handsome 50-year-old father of four from the northern state of Schleswig-Holstein was a writer and translator (including the poems of Roger McGough and Ted Hughes) before becoming a politician in his late 30s. He has the same relaxed, articulate anti-establishment/establishment manner of a Blair or Macron. You can understand his appeal.
But how come a conservative-green alliance now seems such an uncontroversial possibility in Europe’s most important country? And what problems will such an alliance face in the future?
The new potential alliance is partly a matter of the contingencies of German politics — the further big strides to the centre taken by the Greens in recent years, and the implosion of the Social Democrats as the main party of the centre-Left.
But there is a deeper logic, too, that suggests it might be a historical accident that the green movement in general has hitherto ended up so definitively on the Left. After all, conservative and conservation share the same Latin root, con servare, meaning to protect from loss or harm. And there are many overlaps in the worldview of greens and conservatives: the belief that local is best, small is beautiful, a respect for limits, a belief in what is natural and harmonious, an interest in intergenerational continuity.

There has also been a kind of policy convergence. On the one hand, environmental priorities have gone mainstream — whether de-carbonising the economy or, in Germany, closing the nuclear industry —and on the other hand, market mechanisms have become an increasingly popular means to green ends.
The Green party itself has certainly travelled a long way since its formation as a radical anti-nuclear, anti-Nato, alternative life-style movement in the early 1980s. It entered the Bundestag with 5.7% of the vote in 1983, but found itself out of step with the rest of the country in the reunification period (its slogan was “Everyone is talking about Germany, we are talking about the weather!”).
It bounced back later in the 1990s, and joined the red-green coalition government of Gerhard Schroder in 1998 (though only on 6.7% of the vote) with Joschka Fischer becoming foreign minister. It has been out of national government since 2005, but has been in 11 out of 16 state-level governments and has seen its support creep up as the Social Democrats have crumbled, hitting a high note of 20% in the 2019 European elections and even outstripping the governing CDU-CSU in some recent opinion polls.
Meanwhile the party, as symbolised by Habeck, has become completely salonfähig (meaning socially acceptable). It is friendly to business, happy with Nato membership and comfortable with the compromises of power. When Habeck and Annalena Baerbock were elected on a joint ticket in 2018, they were embraced, largely uncritically, by almost all of the German media.
This is partly because German politicians have been unusually bland and dull in recent years. There was a thirst for something new —remember how this country fell for Nick Clegg not that long ago? The two Greens are attractive and articulate. Also, their election was the final decisive victory for the moderate wing of a party that has traditionally been divided between “realos” and “fundis”.
At the LSE, Habeck delivered a mish-mash of mainly familiar centre-Left ideas with some nice phrases, for example about how populists offer “not competence but intimacy”, and a welcome acknowledgement, from a progressive politician, of the importance of emotions in politics, albeit in a Hegelian frame  — “recognition is the driver of human history”.
He repeated a story he likes to tell about talking to workers in the dirty, declining industries in the old east Germany (where the Greens do not poll strongly) and prefacing his remarks to them like this: “Before we talk about what comes next, I am going to say thank you to you and your parents for dedicating your life and health to building the old industrial heart of this country.”

He sees that recognition, respect and status are as much the currency of society, and therefore politics, as money. And he also acknowledges that it is the neglect of these psychological factors in our politics that has been such a blessing for populist parties, who do not make the same mistake.
Fleetingly, it occurred to me as I listened that perhaps there was something to the incongruous idea that not just greens and conservatives but greens and populists are potential bedfellows. Both of them favour attachment to place and want to slow down the machine of liberal modernity. And consider what is happening in Vienna: Austrian Chancellor Sebastian Kurtz who heads the conservative-green alliance there talks about illegal immigration and climate change being equal threats to the Austrian way of life.
But this kind of rhetorical/policy combination is not going to happen in Germany, which Habeck’s speech really confirmed. Green party members, after all, in Germany and elsewhere in Europe, are more highly educated, and sometimes more affluent, than members of most other parties, and especially populist parties whose members are usually at the bottom of both leagues.
Green party members and voters tend to flourish in the knowledge economy and post-industrial society. They mainly live in mobile metropolitan centres, favour openness, are comfortable with social and ethnic fluidity/uncomfortable with authority and tradition, lack strong group or national attachments and worry about discrimination and equalities of many kinds. Their green politics tends to be abstract and top-down and altruistic — a calling to save the planet. Populist party members and voters are almost exactly the opposite on all scores.

Habeck wants a politics of recognition in name only. He may like to flatter the people of east Germany with stories of their heroism but he then tramples all over their political intuitions. “It is simply an illusion that things used to be better,” he said to the LSE audience. No doubt an illusion to the young men, and especially women, in the audience en route to upper professional jobs in government, business or NGOs. But according to countless surveys many people in the declining regions and classes of Europe very strongly believe that the past was better than the present for them.
He also likes to play the old Tony Blair tune that Left-Right has been replaced by open-closed. But has Habeck ever met anyone who wants to live in a closed society? I doubt it.
Yet there are plenty of people, no doubt some of them tempted to vote for Germany’s main populist party the Alternative fur Deutschland (AfD), who think that recent forms of openness have not benefited them as much as those who vote for Habeck’s Green party, many of whom have the option of frictionless professional work or study abroad under EU free movement rules.
Like mainstream German politicians of all stripes, his answer to almost all political problems is “more Europe”. He also reproduced the standard cognitive dissonance on this issue in his speech by calling at one moment for more democracy and bringing politics closer to people while a few moments later calling for the European Commission to become a European government, for more majority voting in the EU and for vast areas of policy to be handed over to only very indirectly accountable technocrats.
One area where he does break with the current German orthodoxy is on ending the anti-Keynesian strict limits on budget deficits both in Germany and the EU, but even that has become something of a new consensus in recent months.
In all other respects, he seems to be making the Green party safe for the average liberal-minded CDU voter. Reaching out to the more socially conservative sections of German society is not on the cards. Habeck rejects the old German idea of the Volkspartei a party that represents all sections of society, even if it may be grounded in one class or another. In its place, he wants an alliance party of different sections of society and value groups. Populists are not welcome. And Habeck is one of the loudest voices wanting to exclude the AfD from the political mainstream, even though they have almost 100 seats in the Bundestag.

Green policy on the environment seems to be mainly a somewhat more radical version of existing German government policy. Though Habeck did speak with great warmth about the Fridays for Future (Extinction Rebellion) movement, and rather chillingly warned of the great dangers ahead if they do not get their way through democratic channels.
How well will this go down with ordinary Germans? Much of the policy, on reducing car use for example, will be a lot more comfortable for affluent Green voters in big cities with efficient public transport, or those able to afford electric cars, than for people in smaller towns and suburbs.
It is hard to see a Gilets Jaunes type movement in Germany coalescing around an increase in petrol taxes. Ordinary Germans worry about climate change too, but if they find that much of the cost of adaptation is falling on them, the love affair with the new Greens could quickly hit a barrier.
By the end of next year, Robert Habeck is highly likely to be grappling with these conservative-green dilemmas as, at the very least, a cabinet minister in Europe’s most powerful country. The progressive establishment in Germany has evidently found a new voice, as his performance at the LSE proved, but one without any discernible new ideas and with the same old intellectual evasions and silences.
Nor is it clear that the Green party as a whole has the personnel or experience to take the next step up to becoming the dominant party, rather than the junior one, in a German coalition. The Green co-leaders have had a long honeymoon but the closer the election looms, the more critical scrutiny they will draw. Despite the rock star appeal of Habeck, it remains to be seen how attractive his party will seem to middle-ground Germans.
Lisa Nandy can't have her cake and eat it - UnHerd
 
I guess if I were still a member of the Labour Party (which I was technically until 31 December 2019, having finally got round to cancelling my annual direct debit earlier in the year), I would vote for Lisa Nandy as the next leader. Judging by her UnHerd interview from last summer, she is vaguely communitarian in outlook and does not think social conservatism is a disease (for which she has been criticised by the Twitter Left).
 
But, oh dear. Thank goodness I no longer have a dog in that fight. For much of the rest of the interview she displays the familiar intellectual and moral confusion of much of the modern left. Nandy in two respects is almost indistinguishable from your average Momentum activist.
First, the inability to see your political opponents as they are, not as your hateful, polarising caricature paints them. Nandy, in the UnHerd interview, accuses Dominic Cummings of being hostile to minority rights. Admittedly she does this via accusing him of wanting to smash liberal democracy (“which protects the rights of minorities”) and being “completely at odds” with the liberal democratic settlement. Cummings is evidently a radical who thinks Britain could work a lot better than it does but to paint him as an angry authoritarian happily stamping on minority rights is just laughable.
Second, Nandy indulges a moral sleight of hand in her conflation of working-class community spirit with a universalist ethos that is distrustful of any limit on the spirit of solidarity (surely close to the opposite of communitarianism).

She tells the story of how around 100 young male African asylum seekers were unexpectedly housed in a hotel in a small former pit village in her Wigan constituency. When this, unsurprisingly, caused a bit of a commotion she called a community meeting and told local people that Wigan had already taken more than its share of asylum seekers and that the council had some powers to refuse to house this latest intake. But she then seems to have shamed the locals into not asking for the Africans to be housed somewhere else.
Freddie Sayers, the interviewer, asks what if they had not accepted the asylum seekers. Would that have been OK too in the name of community empowerment? Nandy sidesteps the question and talks about the working-class tradition of strong community and sticking up for people who are having a hard time.
But we live in a world in which, notwithstanding recent improvements in the living standards of the poor, the vast majority of people on the planet are still “having a hard time” compared with the average citizen of Wigan (and most of the asylum seekers were almost certainly economic migrants, judging by recent refusal rates for asylum).
The whole point of a real community is that it is not a random collection of individuals and it does not encompass the whole world, it must by definition be bounded and should be relatively stable over time (not completely closed) allowing relationships of familiarity and reciprocity to thrive.

It may well be that the 100 young men did not stay that long and were, in any case, easily absorbed for a period by a good-spirited neighbourhood. But to imply that saying no to a substantial disruption to a small community would have somehow been antithetical to the spirit of working-class community is turning logic and the meaning of community on its head.
Nandy assumes that if you trust people and take their concerns seriously they will take the “right” decision. But I would like her to consider the possibility that saying “no” would have been equally acceptable in this case, particularly given Wigan’s disproportionate asylum burden to date. And most important, it would not primarily have been driven, as so many people on the metropolitan Left assume, by xenophobia and racism (notwithstanding some extreme-right grumbling) but by a legitimate spirit of community protection. She might at least have encouraged her constituents to negotiate for something in return for the disturbance.
There is plenty of evidence from social psychology that having a strong “in-group” identity does not translate into hostility to outsiders; if anything, it correlates with a more welcoming attitude. The desire for a reduction in immigration in general in places such as Wigan is based less on hostility to outsiders and more on a feeling that the needs of newcomers are taken more seriously by London (and the Labour Party) than the needs of locals. Immigration has also become an emblem for too-rapid social change that is not in the interests of places like Wigan.
There seem to be two Lisa Nandys. The communitarian sounding champion of the neglected people of Wigan, and the academic universalist who thinks we have equal obligations to all fellow humans, and who seems indifferent to a world of constant churn and high mobility. I would have voted for the first against the second, but it seems that both of them are standing to lead the Labour Party.
2016: the Great Pivot Year - UnHerd
 
The great pivot year was, of course 2016. Brexit and Trump. It is now  clear, from a 2049 perspective, that the Anglo-Saxons led the world into liberal modernity and hyper-globalisation and, in 2016, began to lead them out of it too. And into what most people, especially in the New Christian China, would regard as a better world — albeit with some hair-raising wrong turns along the way.
Historians generally regard America as having won the trade war with China but in almost all other respects one-term President Trump represented the last hurrah of US global power. President Elizabeth Warren pulled the US out of Nato and the WTO. But life went on surprisingly normally, apart from one ugly dispute in Estonia in which two dozen British troops died in a border clash with the Russians.
It turned out that bilateral agreements between the great powers sufficed to keep trade ticking over and for keeping the peace. The Taiwanese, with no one to protect them, were not happy, initially, about being absorbed into the rest of China; but it turned out that the influence of Taiwanese assumptions about freedom, combined with the enormous power of the Christian underground, slowly ate into the power of the Communist party.
The events of 2016 did not come out of the blue; the rumblings had been audible for some time before. And yet on what slender threads did the new era hang! A few thousand votes in a few different places, plus some more plausible defenders of the status quo, and neither Brexit nor Trump would have happened, at least not at that time.

When they did, the world turned on its axis in many surprising ways, slowly at first but more markedly in the 2020s and 2030s. Historians came to call it the great pivot year, from the centrifugal era to the centripetal one.
Western society had been dominated since the 1980s by dispersing centrifugal forces that extended individual freedom but weakened collective bonds and the power of tradition, and in the process allowed smart people to claim undue economic and political rewards. The affluent and cognitively blessed, and the two were invariably combined, became ever more powerful, while many others felt they had lost status and meaning. One journalist, writing in 2016, called them ‘Anywheres’ and ‘Somewheres’.
The end of the Cold War in the early 1990s, and the emergence of post-industrial societies had opened up western societies to an unprecedented degree, and thereby weakened collective national and class identities; meanwhile, diversity of many kinds reduced trust and traditional social norms, while social media created conditions of ‘connected isolation’, promoting narrow tribal identities and individualistic identity politics. And all the while, depression, loneliness and cultish political movements marched on.
The centrifugal era turned out not to be compatible with democracy, and in 2016, the two great English-speaking lands decided that democracy came first and ushered in today’s more centripetal era. The nation state stopped retreating, and economic and cultural openness were both a little more constrained. Immigration fell in most rich countries, partly because of stricter rules, but also, with the exception of Africa, because of sharply rising standards of living in poorer countries.

Today’s centripetal era, which may itself be drawing to a close as 2050 approaches, helped to revive democracy and civic life in part through greater awareness of the psychological roots of what was then called populism — the humiliations and mass resentment built into modern, achievement societies.
As Boris Johnson, the long-serving Prime Minister (and later President) of the UK, put it: “Our beautiful democratic society must level up and find a useful place for everyone, not create a competition in which some succeed and the others fail.” Johnson, who successfully led the UK out of the EU by co-opting and channelling the country’s populist forces, became a model for other centrist and centre-right politicians.
The European Union, a product of the post-national, centrifugal era, was initially shaken by the centripetal one and almost came apart — especially after the election of Marine Le Pen as President of France in 2022 propelled on a nationalist wave after the Royal Navy had sunk several French fishing vessels and English home-owners in the Dordogne were expelled in retaliation.
Johnson and Le Pen more than patched things up in the 2024 Treaty of Calais and Johnson went on to marry Le Pen’s daughter Mathilde. The new Anglo-French Entente paved the way for the UK (minus Northern Ireland which had recently merged with the Republic) to re-enter a much looser EU that looked something like the one it had joined in 1973. The Eurozone had shrunk to Germany and the Benelux countries, and German influence had diminished after the wave of green terror paralysed the country’s energy system in the mid-2020s.

Looking back, one of the remarkable things about 2016, is how unexpected both Brexit and the election of Donald Trump were. How ignorant we then were about our own societies! Such ignorance would be impossible today following the digital citizen project which has truly connected us both to each other and to the local and national state.
After various data scandals, and the failed dirty tricks campaign against Elizabeth Warren in 2020 on the part of the digital giants, the socialisation of the core digital space swept through most western societies, rather as the welfare state had been nationalised after the Second World War. Not only did our digital citizen identities make the provision of state services, especially to the elderly, much more efficient but the constant monitoring of public preferences meant that no more surprises like those of 2016, or the watershed general election of 2019, were possible. (Those of uswho can just about remember surprising elections sometimes regret this.)
Perhaps the most unexpected post-2016 development was the spiritual revival in the UK and elsewhere. The left-behind places and people had been put on the map by Brexit, Trump and European populism. Governments tilted to the new centre, a bit to the Left economically and to the Right socially (in the now quaintly anachronistic political language of the 20th century). In the 10 years or so after 2016, this helped to bring new life and prosperity to some of the poorest regions but it was really the spiritual revival that took off in the mid-2020s that improved the quality of life in the most depressed places.

The post-2016 anxiety about dealing with the polarisation was partly based on the reasonable belief that the negotiation of value differences was going to be harder than dealing with the interest clashes of the old socio-economic politics that dominated the post-Second World War world. It is surely harder, people thought, to split the difference on immigration or family policy than on, say, the desired level of public spending or taxation
This fear turned out to be partly misplaced. The sharply declining hegemony of western countries after 2016— symbolised by the collapse in student numbers from China and India after 2020 — created unifying threats and risks, which pulled people together far more than any nationalist rhetoric ever could.
The new “mass elite” of the expanded higher education sectors of the early 21st century found that the high-status cognitive employment that they thought they had been promised was in sharp decline, thanks mainly to AI. After some flirtation with the hard Left (in the now long-forgotten Corbyn movement in the UK) this group found itself drawn into alliance with the so-called left-behinds under a broadly small-c conservative banner.
The culture wars flared briefly for a few years after 2020, but a new consensus of a kind, finding common ground between liberals and conservatives, emerged under the great reforming Archbishop of Canterbury, Giles Fraser. It was best represented by the adoption, in the UK and across much of Europe, of Hungary’s successful natalist policies. Larger families were encouraged by public policy and became common again, ending what came to be seen as the narcissistic era of one or two-child families.

But this did not, as radicals had feared, mean a reversal of gender equality. Quite the opposite, it brought with it a much greater respect for domesticity and the work of child-rearing and care for the elderly, inside the home as much as in the public economy. So-called Fifth wave feminism was associated with the feminisation of society. Many women still enjoyed success in the public realm and, by 2035, half of all MPs were women. After the monarchy was abolished, following the disastrous reign of Charles III, and Boris Johnson was elected first UK president, he was replaced as PM by Munira Mirza, the third Conservative party female PM (and first PM of Muslim heritage).
The spiritual revival was pioneered by a new form of secular Christianity stripped of much of the traditional theology, though not the ritual. The churches filled again as much as centres of community and neighbourhood as places of deity worship. This went hand in hand with a kind of remoralisation of human relations. More families stayed together for longer and child-care mainly took place within the family, and was increasingly undertaken by fathers (30% of main carers were men by 2035).
The co-option of populism represented by Boris-ism did not succeed everywhere and authoritarian governments did emerge in Austria and Sweden — in the latter after a horrific terrorist incident that killed thousands of people. The Sweden Democrat government imposed a curfew on all Muslims after the attack and many innocent Muslims died in random attacks.
Vegan terrorism was also a problem in parts of Europe, including the UK, even as meat-eating dwindled to being an exotic minority taste.
The dog that didn’t bark, looking at the big concerns of 2016, is climate change. Technological advances, including a final breakthrough in nuclear fusion and in the technology of de-salination, meant a largely carbon-free global economy by 2040 and security of drinking water in poorer parts of the world. Moreover, I am writing on the eve of 2050 in the middle of a mini-ice age, and sea levels have fallen so low that the Boris bridge connecting the UK and France now runs over dry land for several miles at both ends.
It is a wonderful symbol of how the fears of those people once called “Remainers”, who believed that leaving the EU in 2020 would cut off an independent UK from the continent, have proved so wrong.
How Boris can cement his new coalition - UnHerd
 
There are two important things to remember about the new Tory majority. First, the class-party realignment represented by Tory victories in Bolsover and Sedgefield, and Labour ones in Canterbury and Putney, has been happening over a long period of time. Second, it is not just about Brexit but about a whole values/worldview divide — at least partly summed up in my own Anywheres/Somewheres labels — which has afflicted almost all big centre-left parties in Europe as they have come to primarily represent the interests and priorities of their liberal graduate members, activists and MPs.
Brexit did, of course, hasten this realignment. And spare a thought for the Theresa May/Nick Timothy strategy in the 2017 election which was widely ridiculed at the time, because it narrowly failed, but which can now take a bow as a necessary prelude to the breath-taking Tory advances made into historically hostile territory on Thursday.
Brexit, rather like immigration in the past couple of decades, has become an “emblem” policy. Support for Brexit is not so much about the details of EU regulation, rather it has become part of a wider, defensive reaction to the radicalism of the post-Cold War “double liberalism” of free market and cultural opening, represented in the EU by the two central post-national policies of the Euro and free movement.

The challenge for the Tory party now, as Mary Harrington lays out in her election night piece, is to represent aspects of this defensive, national reaction without turning its back on the attractive aspects of the economic and social openness of recent decades. There is no reason why this cannot be accommodated under the canopy of the “One Nation Conservative party” that Boris Johnson talked up last night and throughout the campaign.
On immigration, for example, Johnson has already been shaping policy to appeal to both wings of the new Tory coalition. While the overall stress is on control and a return to more moderate levels, there has been selective liberalisation — over post-student work opportunities, for example.
It is not even impossible that Johnson, pressured by the Spectator magazine’s enthusiasm for it, could announce an amnesty for those illegal immigrants who have been here 10 years or more and who are never going to be deported anyway. Such a gesture to the liberal end of the coalition could be balanced with something for small-c conservatives such as the introduction of a citizen identity system (ID cards in the old language) which would, incidentally, make illegal immigration much harder.

There will also be genuine conflicts of interest between different parts of the new Tory coalition. The small-state, low-tax Toryism of the affluent suburbs has hardly been in the ascendancy in recent years. But it will have to concede further ground to the new Tory voters who want quite high public spending and good public infrastructure. How much ground it will have to concede will be the stuff of battles to come.
Housing is another potential battleground. The interests of younger people and lower income renters not on the ladder are potentially in conflict with those who are already happily housed and worrying about the impact of a massive building programme both on the value of their home and its effect on the green belt.
Meanwhile, in post-school education, the over mighty universities, long institutions of the middle-class Left, may find themselves less favoured, as investment into the battered Further Education sector is prioritised. Yet universities should also be on the front line of a rejuvenated Tory industrial and regional strategy which tries to spread good jobs and economic success more evenly around the country.

So new priorities need not always conflict with old ones. But one interesting thing to follow will be the changing tone and accent (literally) of the Tory party as the proportion of privately educated Tory MPs falls to an all-time low, possibly as low as one-third. The new generation of Tory MP, such as Eddie Hughes the working-class Birmingham man who won Walsall North for the Tories in 2017, do not have a noblesse oblige interest in decent public services for the masses because they have spent their lives depending on them.
People such as Eddie Hughes and the new generation of less middle-class Tories might also have an interesting impact on the party’s attitude to family, gender and race issues. In recent years, British Conservatives have not really offered any kind of alternative to liberal metropolitan thinking in these areas. This could be about to end. Fairness and opportunity for minorities and women need not take the often sectarian and hyper-liberal form of recent years and can better accommodate the priorities of small-c conservatives, in family policy for example.
The fact that Johnson has promoted ethnic minority Brits to leading positions in his cabinet and No 10 also bodes well for more balance in the area of race and minority rights and a willingness to challenge the assumption that any departure from perfectly proportional ethnic representation must always be down to white discrimination.

Is it possible that fresh thinking in these areas, thinking that is closer to what the decent average person thinks, rather than the average university administrator, might even filter through to younger people who are overwhelmingly under the sway of the Left? That is unlikely to change in the short term but if the Tories push back intelligently against ‘woke’ culture, they might find a surprisingly receptive audience among young people.
A significant section of educated Britain has been suffering from Brexit derangement syndrome in recent years. It might be seen as a less alarming version of the 1930s flirtation with communism. But, as in the 1930s, the sophistry and fundamentally undemocratic instinct of many of those wanting to overturn the Brexit vote has come up against the decent common sense of the new Tory voters.
As John Gray put it in a recent A Point of View talk on BBC Radio 4:
“Those who have studied to degree level and beyond have often embraced ideas and projects that many less educated folk instinctively recognise are dangerously absurd. Something like this happened in Britain in the 1930s — much of the intelligentsia was ready to junk democracy in Britain for a new order that they felt was coming into being somewhere else.”
The EU is not the Soviet Union but the quasi-religious embrace of the EU worldview does seem to have driven many people, some of them my best friends, slightly crazy!
This election result is a big blow to the confidence and cultural power of educated, left-liberal Britain. A new coalition of people from many different backgrounds, by no means all Tories, now has an opportunity to push back against the extremes and pathologies of that cultural hegemony.

Will Boris save social democracy? - UnHerd
 
It is hard to muster enthusiasm for any of the main parties or candidates in this election. Even Boris Johnson, as part of the ‘playing it safe’ campaign, has shown more of his bluster-and-evasion face than his witty and eloquent one.
But for someone like me, a conservative social democrat reconciled to Brexit, there is an interesting paradox at play: to make Britain safe for moderate social democracy, you really have to lend your vote to the flamboyant metropolitan Conservative Boris Johnson (or at least hope he wins convincingly).
The Brahmin Left cannot see this, though, and believes the future for social democratic politics over the next decade is “dire”, as Will Hutton put it in the Observer.
But the logic is plain. If Johnson wins a decent majority, it will only be because a sufficient number of mainly lower income voters in the North and the Midlands has switched from Labour to Tory. If this happens, it will shift the voter base of the Tory party and thus the interests that the party represents.

Of course, the party will still also represent a solid block of the most affluent in the South and elsewhere, but why have the 2017 and 2019 Tory manifestos been so relatively quiet about the free market and tax cuts and so noisy about investing in public services? Brexit has forced the party to seek a new segment of the electorate and, contrary to all the talk of lurching to the Right, this strengthens the hand of One Nation Tories who are happy to see the party becoming more like a cross-class Christian Democratic alliance — minus the confessional attachment.
The party will remain in favour of the market economy and enterprise, but it is no longer going to be the party of small government, because its new voter base wants quite high public spending and plenty of redistribution. As Daniel Finkelstein put it in the Times: “If you win Bassetlaw or Hartlepool, you have to become the party of Bassetlaw and Hartlepool.”
You remain the party of the shires and the affluent suburbs too, and this will no doubt create interesting policy conflicts over the coming years — over housing for example — but the Left’s de-regulatory, small-state caricature of the Tories is going to look increasingly unbelievable.
Apart from getting Brexit done, the only other Johnson slogan that I have noticed, particularly evident at the manifesto launch, is that decent public services and public infrastructure underpin a successful market economy — and isn’t that almost a definition of market-friendly social democracy?
There are, of course, many Conservatives whose economic instinct remains more Thatcherite, and who tend to see the public sector as a sort of necessary evil, but they are a political hangover. And incidentally, although there is still a highly disproportionate number of Tory MPs who were privately educated, the proportion has dropped from 75% in the 1970s to 45% now (and possibly below 40% after the election) — so many more will have been dependent on public services most of their lives. Tory candidates look and sound more like the voters than ever before.

There is a second leg to this story about making Britain safe for moderate social democracy: it is the breaking of the hold of the true-believer socialists who currently control the Labour party. A thumping victory for the new Tory party described above is a necessary condition for that outcome.
This change will not happen swiftly and could entail a more complete break-up of the Labour party than the minor splintering we have seen so far. How swiftly exactly will depend on many imponderables, such as how serious the defeat is, which Labour MPs are left standing, and whether, after a second defeat (and maybe a heavy one this time), the Momentum surge might start to lose momentum. This itself might also depend on the medium term socio-economic fate of what one might call the ‘educated just about managing class’ — people with degrees from non-Russell Group universities who end up in jobs not so different from those of their parents.
In any case, a big victory for Johnson surely increases the chances of the sensible centre-Left either recapturing the Labour Party, or leaving it as a hard-Left rump party and establishing a new (Brownite) centre-Left party. This new party would be a few notches to the Left of the new Tory party on economics, and several yards to its Left (if that is the right word) on social and cultural matters.

So here is the second paradox of this election: at least in the medium term, it will shift UK politics in a European direction, with two cross-class “peoples’ parties” (like the CDU and SPD in Germany) with similar approaches to economic management, but with the Tories representing the more socially conservative strands of the electorate and Labour (or its successor party) representing the more liberal strands.
That will also mean that the most free market of the big European countries does not have a party that enthusiastically represents the free market (it is hard to see the social democratic Liberal Democrats filling that gap). But the free market can probably look after itself for now, and if Britain becomes too statist, the electorate will sense it and reshuffle the pack at some point in the future.
One doubt that some people, especially on the Left, will have about this thesis is whether a modest increase in NHS investment and a slogan or two about public infrastructure really amounts to a social democratic shift in the Tory party.
It is true that the Tory manifesto in the end was more modest on public spending commitments than I had hoped, and implicitly less redistributionist than I had wanted, with the promise not to increase any of the main income related taxes. The lack of a proper commitment to a partial socialisation of adult care costs, while understandable politically, was also a disappointment.

So is the Tory party just putting on a more centrist mask to appeal temporarily to the Brexit-voting lower-middle and working classes? I do not think the world works like that. Even for our short-termist, adversarial political culture, that would be an impossibly cynical move. It also ignores the fact that the party has almost certainly lost a section of the middle class over Brexit that needs to be replaced — and not just for one election.
No, from my own observations (and I work part-time in a centre-Right think tank and meet plenty of Tory MPs), I would say that the party — thanks to Brexit — is going through another of its great evolutionary shifts. My own think tank Policy Exchange recently produced a major piece of work calling for the socialisation of adult social care costs (with a supportive forward by that well known 19th century mill-owner Jacob Rees-Mogg).
The last Tory party conference had a mantra of three policies for post-Brexit Britain: sort out social care, build a lot more houses (including public ones for rent) and invest more in non-university, post-school education for the 60% who do not go into higher education. If this is the plan for de-regulated, race-to-the-bottom Britain, it is very craftily disguised.
So why are so many Tories so passionate about leaving the EU if it is not to loosen protections that their new voters are strongly attached to? No doubt there are some who are keen to see the back of the Working Time Directive and so on, but de-regulation and autonomy are here too often confused. The moderate nationalism that Brexit appealed to is the localism of our more globalised world.
Brexit now allows us to make our own choices about immigration, about farm subsidies, about regional aid and state subsidies, about contracting out rules in the public sector, about VAT levels, about the future of our legal system and much more. In many areas we will stick close to EU rules, in other areas we will diverge, and pay some economic price for doing so, but it will be our choice.
Is all this just the grumpy rationalisations of a privileged 60-something who flirted with leftism in his youth and is now returning to his Conservative/conservative roots? Well, I was a member of the Labour party for about 35 years and continued to vote (and sometimes even canvas) for them right up to 2015. I voted Tory in 2017, largely on Brexit grounds (as a Remain voter who wanted the decision implemented), and I might vote Liberal Democrat as an anti-Corbyn tactical vote in 2019. So to the extent that beliefs are expressed through political acts, I think I can now claim a pretty sound centrist record.

It's a bad time for an illegal immigration amnesty - UnHerd
 
The Spectator magazine has reminded Boris Johnson that he has long been a supporter of an amnesty for illegal immigrants and urged him to include a commitment to one in the 2019 Tory manifesto “as a bold expression of the Prime Minister’s personal brand of liberal Conservatism”.
But while there is a case to be made for an amnesty, it certainly shouldn’t be a general one — definitely not in the wake of a Windrush scandal that has, for now, partly paralysed Britain’s internal protections against illegal immigration.
There are many different kinds of illegal immigrant among the estimated one million (well, anything between 500,000 and 1.5m) currently in the country. There are people who came in with a false identity card or passport and live in the mainstream (working, paying  tax, using public services); people who came in legally but have out-stayed their visa, they too may be living in the mainstream undetected by the authorities; there are failed asylum seekers, who can then be subdivided into those known to the authorities (about 80,000) and those who have gone off the radar; and finally those who entered clandestinely on a lorry or boat and remain undetected. The latter often survive in a twilight world in parts of inner-city Britain where exploitation and modern slavery flourishes.
There are also many different kinds of amnesty. There is a general one, intended to encourage everyone here without status to come forward; or there are those defined by category, such as failed asylum-seeking families with young children that are hard to return; and there are those defined by length of time in the country, such as anyone who has been here more than 10 years, who does not have a criminal record.

The Spectator is not clear about what kind of amnesty it wants — although it seems to want something short of a general one. It says: “A common sense line can be drawn between those who have lived here for several years, and those who have not put down roots, who can be removed in a way that deters illegal immigration.” In principle, this is not a stupid idea because the reality is that many illegal immigrants are never going to leave. It is, in an era of human rights law, very hard to remove them, especially those who have been here for a few years and can claim protection under the right to family life. Back in 2004 (under Labour), there were 21,435 forced removals; but in the year to June 2019, that had fallen to below 3,000 (excluding the 5,203 Foreign National Offenders).
Given these circumstances, there are two ways to reduce the stock of illegal immigrants — some form of limited and controlled amnesty for the hardest to remove groups or a so-called hostile environment that makes life so difficult for illegal immigrants that they choose to self-deport.
The sensible option is a combination of the two. Labour initiated a more rigorous system of status checking (and first used the term hostile environment) towards the end of its period in office but Theresa May as Home Secretary after 2010 gave it more teeth. This means that, in the absence of ID cards, the favoured status-checking system in continental Europe, people who have recently moved to the UK have to prove their status for jobs, renting flats, opening bank accounts, using the NHS and so on — with big fines for employers and landlords who are caught employing or renting to illegal immigrants.
For a while it looked as if the hostile environment might be working, as the number of voluntary returns climbed steeply from below 4,000 in 2004 to a peak of nearly 29,000 in 2016 (though better data collection may also have been a factor behind the rise). Partly as a consequence of last year’s Windrush scandal, both enforced and voluntary returns are now falling sharply, enforced returns are just over 8,000 a year (but most of these are Foreign National Offenders who are removed direct from prison) and voluntary returns have fallen to just over 13,000.

Why is the Windrush scandal casting such a shadow? A quick reminder of what happened. More than 1m people came to live in Britain between the late 1940s and the early 1970s in the great post-colonial migration, almost all of whom were granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in 1971. In some cases, they did not acquire the documents to prove it, and in particular the poorer people in this group never acquired a British passport because they could not afford foreign holidays. For several decades this did not matter until, especially after 2010, the UK changed tack from the relative openness of the Labour years to a much more controlled border and a more concerted attempt to tackle illegal immigration.
This is when some of those people who were here legally, especially those of Caribbean background, found themselves being treated as illegal immigrants. More than 80 were actually deported, several hundred more were seriously affected — refused entry into the country after going abroad, lost jobs, refused NHS treatment — though nobody knows the exact number. Thanks to a Guardian campaign that placed this injustice on the national agenda in April last year, Amber Rudd had to resign as Home Secretary.
It is fair to say that this was an egregious error stemming from an over-zealous application of the striving for greater control symbolised by Theresa May’s period as Home Secretary. There are all sorts of more specific reasons for the mistake: the loss of historical memory in the Home Office, a “tick-box” culture being applied by people too junior to be taking these decisions, perhaps also the lack of people of relevant ethnic minority backgrounds at the top of the department who might, through family experience, have recognised that the Home Office was wrongly classifying a whole category of legal British residents.

But there is a very powerful account from the Left (summarised in the recent book, The Windrush Betrayal by Amelia Gentleman who covered the story for The Guardian), which states that the mistreatment of the Windrush victims was not a mistake at all but a deliberate policy, the inevitable result of a draconian attempt to reduce immigration, combined with an inhuman system of internal status checks, all driven by racism in both the Home Office and the wider society. The report on lessons of Windrush by Wendy Williams, expected early next year, is likely to reinforce a version of this account.
The policy conclusion from this account is that the hostile environment should in effect be scrapped and almost all forced deportations (apart from criminals) be stopped too. This is where we are currently heading. One Home Office official told me that once someone gets into the country illegally, their chances of being deported are now close to zero. Moreover, the chances of them leaving voluntarily are also close to zero because the hostile environment, apart from employer checks, has also been largely suspended, meaning that information about suspected illegal immigrants is no longer handed over by landlords, banks or NHS officials to the Home Office. Survival is now far easier for illegal immigrants.
The Windrush scandal is not a reason to scrap the current system — which is really a cumbersome UK version of an ID card system for non-citizens — but to make it work better and make sure, with the introduction of a Home Office ombudsman and other such measures, that the Windrush scandal can never be repeated. And if status checks tend to be demanded more from people who do not look or sound like the British majority then the simple answer is to make everyone submit to a status check when taking a job or renting a property.
Immigration restrictions are always most likely to be aimed at people from poorer countries, and people from such countries tend not to be white. If that makes immigration restrictions racist then the Home Office is racist. But it is also worth recalling that the largest national category turned away at the border every year are Americans (mainly white) and the top three countries for forced returns in 2019 were Romania, Albania and Poland.

The Home Office’s completely legitimate attempt to bear down on the scourge of illegal immigration has, in effect, been kicked into touch. The Immigration Enforcement department of the Home Office employs nearly 5,000 people and spends almost £500m a year and parts of it are now paralysed by the post-Windrush trauma. Many of the decent people who work in it have been made to feel dirty about the important public service they perform. Too many of them are leaving.
This is why all talk of an amnesty has to be treated with great caution. Britain is, and will remain, an internationally open “hub” country inviting large annual flows across its borders. There were 142m arrivals into the UK last year. About 120m of those people are UK and EU citizens who have the right to live and work here, but 20m are people who do not have that automatic right and 3m of them came in on time-limited visas. The temptation, especially for some people from poorer countries, to overstay a visa is considerable before even mentioning the tens of thousands who arrive every year clandestinely on lorries or boats and a similar number who have their asylum claims turned down but are seldom removed.
There is a constant struggle by Immigration Enforcement to keep these numbers down and prevent the illegal population running out of control. So now is not the time for Boris Johnson to make a flamboyant gesture on amnesty, much as his sister-in-law might like it (his brother, Jo, is married to Amelia Gentleman). A general amnesty is a terrible idea and would be a huge incentive to illegal immigration at a time when the policing of the internal border has been severely weakened.
Clearly in the longer term, when the Home Office has recovered from the Windrush trauma, we need a sensible combination of quiet regularisation — I would favour an amnesty for anyone who has been here over 10 years — plus a restored hostile environment (with proper safeguards to ensure no repeat of the Windrush scandal), and deportation, enforced if necessary, for those who have no right to be here.

It also makes sense to bribe people more generously to leave. Some of those funds that the Department for International Development sits on could be usefully employed helping illegal immigrants to return home with the promise of support to start a small business or fund a course of study or something similar. Many illegal immigrants are among the most energetic and ambitious citizens of poorer countries and while it is understandable that they want to short circuit the historical process by jumping straight into the rich world, their fellow citizens badly need them to help their countries catch up.
Of course, there is one simple policy idea that would have prevented the Windrush scandal, would deter illegal immigration, and would simplify relations between the individual and the state—the introduction of a national system of citizen identification (ID cards in old language). That is something worth putting in the Tory manifesto.
If only we could be more like Bavaria - UnHerd
 
As rich European countries have become more open and fluid since the end of the Cold War it has exacerbated the conflict between liberals and conservatives or, in my language, between the educated, mobile, “Anywheres” and more rooted, protection-conscious “Somewheres.”
Some countries are absorbing these conflicts better than others. And there is one place, in particular, that continues to flourish in the era of polarisation — the southern German state of Bavaria.
It is one of the richest and most economically dynamic corners of Europe but is also famous for its conservative politics and Catholic traditionalism and sense of place — even the co-leader of the Bavarian Greens, Katharina Schulze, wore a traditional dirndl dress when canvassing in last year’s state election.
The German lands of Europe have traditionally come under the sway of either Berlin or Vienna, and Bavaria is in some ways culturally closer to Vienna. Bavaria fought on the side of Napoleon in the early 19th century, was one of the least pro-Nazi states, and its exceptionalism is underlined by the fact that it never signed the German “basic law” constitution in 1949.
Historically it was a largely agricultural state with no significant natural resources; Germany’s pre-1945 industrial powerhouses were the Ruhr region in the west and Silesia in Prussia.
But after the Second World War this all changed dramatically and Bavaria was one of the principle beneficiaries. Following Germany’s defeat, Prussia, one of the most successful and significant states in modern European history, was wiped off the map and the Prussians were, in effect, ethnically cleansed. Many of them ended up in Bavaria.

It is one of the best kept secrets of post-war German history that Bavaria’s economic take-off after 1945 was partly driven by emigrant Prussians and Sudeten Germans from Czechoslovakia. Millions found refuge in US-controlled Bavaria and some of the biggest names in German industry — such as Siemens, Allianz, Osram and Agfa — moved their headquarters from Berlin to Munich.
Bavaria has its own conservative party, the Christian Social Union, which is autonomous from, but in permanent alliance with, the main German centre-right party, the Christian Democrats. From 1961 to 1988 the CSU was led by the pugnacious but economically pragmatic Franz-Joseph Strauss who helped to establish Bavaria as the economic success story it is today in cars, defence and aerospace, electronics and most recently in the new digital industries.
The region has one of the best education and vocational training systems in Germany, not just for the cognitive elites but for competent middling performers too. It also boasts a network of top universities and research institutes, including the headquarters of the Max Planck institute which also moved to Munich after 1945 changing its name from the Kaiser Wilhelm Society. Former federal President Roman Herzog coined the phrase “laptops and lederhosen” to describe the state’s unusual blend of innovation and tradition.
The CSU has run Bavaria throughout the post-war period and although it has adapted with the times it remains considerably more conservative than the CDU. CSU leaders were vehemently opposed to Angela Merkel’s refugee policy and almost brought down Germany’s coalition government over it. Viktor Orban is a frequent visitor to Bavaria and his Hungarian Fidesz party was for many years protected by the CSU from being expelled from the main centre-right grouping of European political parties, the EPP. More recently CSU members outraged liberal opinion in Germany by opposing a leadership proposal for quotas for women in the party.

The CSU is probably the last remaining true “Volkspartei” in Germany with a solid representation in all social classes, including the working class.
Bavaria also has a powerful left-liberal tradition in the big cities, which are mainly run by the Social Democrats and/or Greens. The Suddeutsche Zeitung, based in Munich, is Germany’s most influential liberal daily and has a lighter touch than its northern rivals. Munich is an open city with a distinctively southern variation on German-ness.
But a strong sense of belonging to Bavaria can accommodate both the traditionalist small farmer 100 miles outside Munich and a young, liberally-minded, digital entrepreneur in the state capital. The two-week Oktoberfest beer festival at the end of September every year is a celebration of Bavarian traditions that attracts around 6m foreign tourists and somehow manages to make historic peasant costumes seem cool.
Can this happy co-existence of Anywheres and Somewheres last? I was making the case for “model Bavaria” to a Social Democrat politician in Berlin a few months ago who, not surprisingly, did not like the idea. Moreover, he claimed that Bavaria is becoming a victim of its own success. By attracting so many people from all over Germany the distinctive Bavarian brand is being diluted. Soon, he said, it will be a German state like any other.
Other Germans, some of them migrants to Bavaria, say that is to miss the point — newcomers like, and want to preserve, Bavarian-ness. And, as its post-war history shows, this powerfully rooted place has been able to absorb millions from outside.

This was true before the war too; Ludwig Erhard, one of the shapers of Germany’s post-war economic miracle, came from the Protestant community of the wine region of northern Bavaria which also once had a flourishing Jewish community, Henry Kissinger and my own distant relatives the Lehman banking family were products of it.
Although CSU politicians take a hard line in general against mass immigration, they took a disproportionate number of refugees after the 2015 surge. Bavaria is likely to make a greater success of the influx than most other states thanks to the most efficient administration in the whole of Germany and the most no-nonsense police force.
It is too early to say how the integration process is going but it is generally easier for outsiders to integrate into a place that has a strong sense of itself, as, in the UK context, Scotland has shown in recent decades. Bavaria has a strong but open indigenious culture, anyone can wear lederhosen, and perhaps illustrates how a clear Leitkultur (dominant culture) rather than something to be ashamed of can help to foster integration.
Bavarians also tend to have strong sub-Bavarian local and regional connections and a healthy relationship to the bigger national entity. They say: “Because I am Bavarian I am German.” By contrast, a Scot is more likely to say: “I’m a Scot, hence British but certainly not English.” And many Catalans would say: “I’m Catalan, hence not Spanish.”
Bavaria is not, of course, completely untouched by the winds of polarisation, and the hard-right AFD polled 10% in last year’s state election, reducing the CSU vote share to 37%, its lowest figure ever. But conservative Bavarian politics has now also thrown up a new big beast — Marcus Söder — who seems capable of pushing the CSU back up over 40% and is now being whispered about as a possible successor to Angela Merkel in Berlin.
If only some of that Bavarian magic could be sprinkled over the whole of Germany and, indeed, the rest of Europe.
Boris Johnson has what it takes to win the new non-liberal, non-metropolitan centre ground
This election gives the Tories a vital second chance to create a new centre ground in British politics. It will be less liberal and metropolitan than the Blair-Cameron centre, and more respectful of the priorities of Brexit voters. Under Theresa May, the party flunked this opportunity. Can it get it right now?
Tilting slightly to the Left in economics and courting a more blue-collar voter base is not in principle a problem for this most adaptable of political parties. And Boris Johnson, for all that Labour will play up the “born to rule” arrogance, travels light ideologically, once describing himself as a pro-Brexit Michael Heseltine. But can he achieve the apparently impossible, assembling a critical mass of the degree-holding, mobile, individualistic, professional, Remain-inclined “Anywheres” and the less well-educated, more rooted, communitarian, Leave-inclined “Somewheres”?
The noises off sound promising. I was talking recently to a Thatcher-era Cabinet minister who gave his blessing to Johnson’s more relaxed attitude to public spending, with the old foes of rampant inflation and union power dead. The post-Brexit policy menu at Tory conference, meanwhile, involved fixing adult social care, building more homes (including public ones) and boosting technical training – what has been called a “conservatism of the common good” aimed at the just about managing classes, especially in the Leave strongholds in the Midlands and the North.
And there is a more macro reason why the Tories should be well set to benefit from the more cultural tone of British politics of recent years – the new focus on security and identity issues, borders and boundaries. The country’s majority common sense on everything from immigration to crime and the family is not illiberal but small-c conservative, especially outside the urban centres. And politically it is much easier for the centre-Right to move Left on economic issues than for the centre-Left to move to the Right on cultural issues, which are embedded in the very sense of identity of so many Left-wing activists.
Of course, that does not make it a shoo-in for this new Brexit-flavoured conservatism. With half of all voters switching allegiance since the 2010 election, the electorate is at its most volatile since the introduction of the universal franchise. The Tories failed to make sufficient inroads into the Labour vote in the Midlands and the North in 2017 and Labour campaigners describing a Tory party that exists only in their imaginations – hell-bent on privatising the NHS – could still scare enough voters into staying loyal.
Whenever I tell Left-wing friends that I work at a centre-Right think tank, Policy Exchange, and we have just published a paper advocating the socialising of adult social care, with a preface by Jacob Rees-Mogg, they simply don’t believe me. It is hard to dislodge well-entrenched prejudices.
And the Left has another big advantage: its values dominate the world-view of the under-forties. The common sense of most younger and many middle-aged people – especially the better-educated in the big cities and the public sector – is overwhelmingly on the Left. (I recently heard the counter-extremism coordinator of a London borough, an apparently mainstream council official, lamenting that her job was now impossible, under an “extremist” Prime Minister.)
The adage holds that in the 1980s the Right won the economic argument and the Left won the cultural argument. This has not changed much. With the rapid expansion of higher education, the Left-liberal cultural hegemony has if anything got stronger. The Tories used to be the party of economic globalisation while remaining sceptical of cultural globalisation (cosmopolitanism and universalism), while for Labour, especially those on the Left, it was the other way round, against economic globalisation while adoring cultural globalisation.
But the largest section of the electorate likes neither of those options and would prefer a market-friendly social democracy in economics and a moderate conservatism in social and cultural matters. Johnson may be a flamboyant pro-market liberal by temperament, but he seems better placed to offer such a combination to Brexit-impasse Britain than anyone else.
Time for our political packages to be re-sorted - The Post
I have been doing some online dating recently which gives you a lot of practice both in presenting yourself and in noticing tribal politics in other people.
I was having a friendly online chat with one woman and she asked me what I thought of Boris Johnson. As this was the Guardian’s online dating site and she had described herself as a socialist I assumed there was likely to be a correct and an incorrect answer here. But as I was quite interested in her I tried to be truthful in the least off-putting manner.
I said I had voted Remain but think we should respect the Brexit vote and I would certainly consider voting Tory if Boris Johnson stood the best chance of bringing the country together around a One Nation programme, perhaps not that different from the 2017 Tory election programme (shorn of the silly bits on adult care).
Pre-empting her own tribal thinking I also added that I don’t think you can read off peoples’ attitudes and behaviour in everyday life from their voting decisions. I know arrogant, selfish socialists and generous, self-effacing Tories.
Alas, I never heard from her again. 
Life is so much more interesting when you cannot predict someone’s views on pretty much everything from the way they are dressed or what they think of Boris Johnson.
For many years I have been quoting the American political thinker Daniel Bell who when asked for his political credo back in the 1980s said: “I am a social democrat in economics, a liberal in politics and somewhat conservative on social and cultural issues.” It is more or less my credo too.
This is not a traditional Left/Right-package. But it is, of course, a package of its own. I have called it the “hidden majority” package which for various historical reasons no mainstream party of Left or Right has been able to adopt. The Left went off in a culturally liberal direction in the 1970s and never came back, indeed, with the rise of Left-wing identity politics it has become even more hostile to social conservatism. The Right went hard free market in the 1980s, but has been shuffling back more recently.
Partly thanks to Brexit and the new, more blue-collar voters that the Tories are now trying to appeal to, this new “hidden majority” package is now the centre of a lot of political attention. The old Blair/Cameron liberal centre is giving way to a new centre that accommodates the priorities of at least some of the Brexit voters.
With a bit of tweaking — perhaps adding market-friendly before social democrat — the Daniel Bell credo could be said to lie behind the 2017 Tory manifesto and possibly a future Boris Johnson one too.
Is this new political package about to have its moment?
What Bruce Springsteen tells us about Community - The Post
Blinded by the Light is not a great film but I enjoyed it for several reasons. It is loosely based on the Bildungsroman “Greetings from Bury Park,” by Sarfraz Manzoor, chronicling the turmoil of a teenage British-Pakistani boy growing up in Luton in the 1980s and his unlikely love affair with the music of Bruce Springsteen. And that book was commissioned, in part, thanks to a piece I published by Sarfraz — From Lyllapur to Luton — in Prospect magazine in December 2001, just after 9/11. The film also has a walk-on part by my nephew Leo Shirley!
 But I like the film even more because of what it tells us, intentionally or unintentionally, about our modern ambivalence about the idea of community. Everybody in politics likes community in theory, one of the commonest anxieties about the modern world is that communities are weaker than they used to be. Rising loneliness, deaths of despair, mental illness are all, with some justice, blamed on weaker communities.
Yet so many of the things that contribute to thinner communities are actively chosen by us: smaller families, greater mobility (also encouraged by mass residential higher education) within and between countries, individual autonomy and the right to be ourselves. We actively choose wider but shallower networks. And modern politics celebrates inclusiveness yet any meaningful community must have boundaries and must therefore exclude.
Our hypocrisy over community is the central theme of Blinded by the Light. The film celebrates the beleaguered Pakistani community of Luton. The film is also a showcase for the music of Bruce Springsteen who famously celebrates the battered blue collar communities of post-industrial America. I am no expert on Springsteen lyrics but most of the songs in the film also seemed to be celebrating escaping from such places. That is certainly what Javed, the Sarfraz character, draws from Springsteen — he is a symbol of American freedom and escape from the claustrophobic and authoritarian world of his Pakistani community.
We want to have our cake and eat it not just on Brexit but on community too. We want security, familiarity and belonging, all the warm things we associate with settled communities, but we also want freedom, individual autonomy, ambition and social mobility which weaken settled communities by encouraging people to leave them — particularly the most able.
Sarfraz Manzoor is a successful journalist who now lives in London and Blinded by the Light is ultimately a celebration of his escape. Perhaps this then is the central challenge of post-Brexit British politics or perhaps politics in all rich countries. How can the Sarfrazes follow their dreams and leave for the big city without making those who stay feel that they have been left behind and diminished, how can the stayers have the same opportunity to live successful and fulfilled lives as the leavers?
To adapt the famous quote from the Leveller-supporting Thomas Rainsborough at the Putney Debates in 1647 during the English civil war: “The most settled hee that is in England hath a life to lead as the most mobile hee.”
New book puts the movement of people into deeper context
 
 
Like the proverbial man with the hammer for whom everything is a nail, for the liberal-minded professor of migration everything significant in post-war Europe has had the indomitable migrant at the heart of it. This book is a work of advocacy on behalf of the “voiceless” migrant and refugee, though because there is so much to cram in, it often reads like a list of events interspersed with bouts of indignation.
Its claim to originality lies in connecting what author Peter Gatrell calls the “violent peacetime” of late-Forties Europe, when as many as 17 million people were on the move, with the subsequent post-colonial migrations, the new wave of relocations after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the more recent refugee crisis.
This continuity serves a polemical purpose by implying that Europe has always been on the move, so why are we so irrationally unsettled about it now? But the analogy does not bear examination. The movement in the Forties was a one-off migration of Europeans, with more than 10 million of the 17 million on the move being the German minorities who had been scattered through eastern Europe and Russia, many of them settled there for hundreds of years, but who now had to return to Germany in a hurry, paying the price for Hitler’s war.
The more recent immigration story into Europe has been mainly from outside the Continent, from more culturally distant places, and it is ongoing. And in recent years the cumulative scale has been greater than in that post-war turbulence. Britain, for example, was relatively untouched by those post-war movements beyond absorbing a few hundred thousand displaced persons or people, mainly Poles, fleeing communism.
But in the past 20 years immigration has increased the population of the UK, mainly England, by more than five million. In 1970 the population of London was almost 90 per cent white British and it is now about 40 per cent.
Gatrell’s book reminds me of those arguments about immigration when the pro-immigration advocate, dismissive of current anxieties, will point to the fact that 50,000 Huguenots arrived in the 17th century as evidence that we have always been a melting pot. For the past 15 years more than 500,000 people have arrived every year, albeit many of them temporarily. Scale matters.
The one country for whom the analogy with the post-war period might work is Germany. After absorbing so many ethnic Germans into a shattered country just after the war, the country was faced with another huge wave of newcomers after 1989: yet more ethnic Germans from the former Soviet Union, a wave of several million east Germans moving west and hundreds of thousands of asylum seekers from the Balkan wars.
Gatrell is right to devote so much space to Germany and the book does have some other redeeming features: the story of how Poles from the land lost to the Soviet Union in the east were transferred to occupy the new lands taken from Germany in the west; the ambivalence shown to the returning white settlers after the end of empire in many places, especially France; his detailed knowledge of population movements in Russia and points east.
Yet he also fails to convince on the centrality of migration to most European countries, at least until the political disquiet of recent years. The creation of welfare states, the movement from country to town, mass affluence, gender equality, mass secondary and then higher education, de-industrialisation were all major developments in which migration played a negligible role.
And the book essentially ignores native populations. When the natives are not racist they are patronising, even when teaching someone to use a fork, something that one might think would be quite helpful. Newcomers are hard-working, resilient, cheerful, and have come selflessly to rebuild economies, serve in the NHS, and so on.
He is right that British politicians over-claim for the UK’s generosity on asylum, especially in recent years, but fails to mention the one period when we were absorbing about 100,000 a year for a few years at the time of the Kosovo conflict. And the hostile environment was not, as he says, for migrants but for illegal migrants — rather an important difference.
This is not a book for trade-offs or dilemmas and Gatrell is too incurious to consider how a desirable degree of migration openness can be reconciled both with most peoples’ preference for a relatively stable way of life and with the tenacity of attachment to nation states and citizenship, which is surely the real lesson of the post-war European story.
Norman Tebbit’s cricket test was never xenophobic, but it could do with a liberal amendment
The sporting summer reaches a kind of crescendo today with half the country flicking three ways between the British Grand Prix, the Wimbledon men’s final and the cricket world cup final at Lord’s.
It won’t exactly match the Olympic summer of 2012 and the way Team GB unexpectedly brought the country together in a happy embrace. For a start, neither Formula One nor tennis tend to evoke strong national sentiments in the way team sports do.
Moreover, the cricket world cup did not see the whole country getting behind the English team, as many British Indians and Pakistanis backed their ancestral teams against England. And what was so remarkable was that this spectacular failing of the “Tebbit test” seemed barely worthy of comment.
Quick reminder: Norman Tebbit coined his test in an interview with the Los Angeles Times back in 1990 when he said: “A large proportion of Britain’s Asian population fail to pass the cricket test. Which side do they cheer for? It’s an interesting test. Are you still harking back to where you came from or where you are?”
Tebbit, interviewed by Rajan Datar for a BBC Radio 4 documentary on his test last week, stood by it. And why not? The test has been dismissed down the years, and was again in the documentary, as foolish and xenophobic. But Tebbit was surely just expressing one view of what integration looks like.
When you move permanently to live in another country, you have to give up some things and acquire new commitments. Some degree of common allegiance is a necessary part of the glue that holds society together. We are not just a random collection of individuals: we need some solidarity and mutual sympathy to make a welfare state possible and sustain civility in politics and everyday life.
In the absence of war and national emergencies, sport is an important source of national common allegiance and connection – hugging a stranger in a pub when England’s footballers finally manage to win a penalty shoot out. And when ethnic minorities play for the national teams, it could hardly be a more powerful symbol of contributing to the national project, literally strengthening the team.
Moreover, in some ways the Tebbit test should be easier to accept today. Back in the 1980s, everyday hostility to ethnic minorities was commonplace, in a way that is rarely the case today. Also, both India and Pakistan were then still relatively junior cricketing nations, whereas now India is the epicentre of world cricket.
But the critics do have half a point. The Tebbit test was, and is, too sweeping and prescriptive. Liberal societies should not insist on what form national allegiance should take for individuals. Strong national identities do not require cultural uniformity and can accommodate fluid and hybrid attachments. There are many different sub-national identities in Scotland, from Scandinavian heritage Scots to border Scots, but they can all rally around the flag.
It is, of course, possible to be a passionately patriotic British Indian or Pakistani except in the matter of cricket. And 70 to 80 per cent of South Asian Brits support the England (or Scottish or Welsh or Northern Irish) football team.
British public opinion remains maturely tolerant of continuing ancestral attachments. A British Future poll has found that 60 per cent of the public agrees that when people settle here they should be able to support the teams of their country of origin, even against British teams, without being accused of not fitting in, with only 15 per cent insisting that they back British teams.
So, I want to propose a liberal amendment to the Tebbit test. When people settle here they should join in, lend their allegiance to their new country and preferably support its teams – except when those teams are playing the teams of their ancestors’ countries.
But how many generations should that last? When the British Future poll also asked about the children of immigrants, the number who thought it was fine that they too should support the team of their parents’ country fell slightly to 50 per cent. And that also seems right.
Today only about 20 per cent of South Asian Brits support the England cricket team. But maybe in another three generations, when half of the England cricket team are called Patel or Ali or other South Asian names, and India and Pakistan are distant memories, the home of long-forgotten great-great-grandparents, the Tebbit test will finally be passed with flying colours by most Brits of Indian and Pakistani heritage.
Post-industrial Britain – richer, freer and sadder | The Conservative Woman
 
It is hard to speak with any confidence about the mentalities, or levels of contentment, of people in earlier eras. But it may be that industrial society, especially in its most recent phase in the 20th century, including democratic equality and welfare states, was better at distributing self-respect and status than today’s post-industrial society, especially for men. We are richer and freer but often more adrift.
The movement from the country to the town in the early 19th century was often physically disruptive and involved, at least for a short period, an increase in suffering and reduced longevity. But life quite soon become significantly better than it had been in the countryside. Indeed, 1845, the year that Friedrich Engels published his description of industrial misery, The Condition of the Working Class in England, was just about the point when things started to improve.
Improved public hygiene and the arrival of cheap food from Australia and the Americas were just two ways in which the lives of most people were transformed for the better in the second half of the 19th century.
This was not just about incomes and living conditions; new forms of meaning and self-respect soon established themselves too. The urban identity itself quickly came to be seen as superior to the rural one, indeed the term peasant was soon established as a term of abuse, and there was no discernible movement back from the town to the country. Moreover, new forms of skilled and semi-skilled work in the factories and workshops conferred status and respect on both men and women.
Urbanisation was associated with education and betterment, as opposed to what Marx called the idiocy of rural life – it is no surprise that when the franchise was extended to the ordinary man (at this stage not the ordinary woman) it was the urban householder who was entrusted with the vote almost two decades before his rural cousin.
Moreover, for all of the external upheaval in the early decades of industrialisation, people’s inner life and moral universes often remained surprisingly unchanged. There was a significant amount of continuity in traditional understandings of the world and in social and gender roles.
Christianity remained the central organising belief system for most people, although it took new forms in the new urban centres in low-church Methodism and similar radical forms of Protestantism. Women began working outside the home in larger numbers, but family life appears to have been strengthened not weakened with the movement into towns, as rates of illegitimacy fell throughout the 19th century, at least in Britain.
It is in the nature of class stratified societies for status, meaning your place in the pecking order of social respect, to be a powerful given that few people can escape from. This restricts human opportunity but also gives people an explanation of their position in the hierarchy that has little bearing on their abilities or intelligence. In a relatively immobile class society, if you fail to rise from the working class into more genteel society it is no reflection on your own aptitudes, it is just the way things are.
It can also consolidate a sense of group solidarity and make a project of collective advance – such as trade unionism or socialism – seem more relevant than individual aspiration. Trapped in steerage together, the passengers will probably develop a sense of common interest. Given a ladder to the upper decks and people are more likely to elbow each other out of the way.
And this is what has happened in the post-industrial society. The main distributor of status and income is individual educational achievement and the ethos, if not always the reality, of the society is open and meritocratic. Those who do not enter into the cognitive class by taking A-levels at school (or graduating from high school in the US, taking the Bac in France or the Abitur in Germany) and going into higher education have, in the main, more restricted opportunities and lower social status than those who do. And this lower status is partly the result of their own cognitive limitations, or at least is widely perceived to be so by society and by many of the individuals themselves.
Some people have the resilience to avoid feelings of failure and may achieve a degree of success despite being in society’s slow lane but many others internalise a feeling of low self-respect which creates a pervasive sense of anxiety and uselessness.
There are several compounding problems that contribute to post-industrial disenchantment.
Post-industrial society has eroded the potentially compensating belief systems provided by religion, which recognises you for your character, not your ability, and sees you as equally valued in the eyes of God. It has done the same to the traditional roles in the private realm – such as male breadwinner or nurturing mother and wife – which may be restrictive but also confer meaning and purpose. The institutions that have historically accepted you as a member unconditionally – such as family, church, nation – are all weakened in a freer and more individualistic society. Achieved identities based on educational and career success have eclipsed ascribed identities based on attachment to place and group.
And post-industrial society elevates the values and priorities of the highly educated to a more dominant position and those views tend to be secular, individualistic, anti-tradition and anti-authority. Post-industrial modernity is often fluid and disorientating – more wealth, but less meaning, as the historian Yuval Noah Harari puts it – and is easier for some people to adapt to than others.
There is another problem. We now have, broadly speaking, a single route into a single dominant cognitive class. And although the graduate cognitive class is now much bigger and more democratic than it was 50 years ago it passes through a narrower funnel: go to a decent university, a Russell Group one if possible, and then into a professional middle-class career. Until quite recently there were many more and varied routes to a degree of achievement and respect. There was a working-class elite, for example, in the trade unions, friendly societies and Labour party, different regional elites in provincial cities and, at a work-place level, meaningful progression from below was possible without qualifications.
And, in any case, it looks increasingly likely in today’s economy that the cognitive class is going to shrink not grow. We will continue to need a thin layer of highly talented people who write the relevant software and provide the top professionals in everything from law to medicine, engineering, design, and finance. But the next round of AI is going to cut a swathe through the middle ranks of professional life and potentially create an even bigger status gulf between the most able and the rest.
Finally, the frame of comparison that people use to evaluate their lives has become much wider. People used to compare themselves in terms of wealth or talents of various kinds to people in their own village. Even after urbanisation people in a stratified class society would mainly compare themselves to people a few rungs above or below them on the ladder. For many, the shop steward, the supervisor or lay preacher was a figure of respect and an achievable model for emulation. With mass media, television and radio, and now social media it is harder for people to avoid comparing themselves unfavourably with the brightest, most beautiful and most talented in the world, which is thought to be one of the causes of rising mental stress especially among young women.
People seek meaning in their lives and a sense of being useful to others as well as material comfort, freedom and justice. Post-industrial society provides far more comfort and opportunity than industrial society but maybe the latter did better on meaning and self-respect. We cannot and do not want to go back to a past when social horizons and life chances were far more limited, but a recognition of some of the merits of earlier eras might help us to see more clearly the pathologies of today’s post-industrial achievement society.
Wishful thinking and unresolved tensions:
 
My book, The British Dream, included a section on the philosophy of multiculturalism, which concluded with these thoughts (Goodhart, 2013: 208–209):
Much of the work of multiculturalist writers is highly abstract, with little attempt to test the ideas against the real world. And multiculturalism in the universities has had no significant internal opposition to bring it back down to earth. Yet, as one of the intellectual manifestations of post-war immigration, it has brought some insight, and passion, into old debates on liberalism, pluralism, universalism, relativism, religious freedom and identities. And a few good ideas have emerged over recent years. One example is Bhikhu Parekh’s idea of ‘operative public values’ – how values are often hidden or implicit in national institutions, which then tends to favour insiders who enjoy a kind of implicit knowledge. These values should be made more explicit; indeed, if we are trying to reimagine national citizenship for a more plural but still coherent society, many things must be made more explicit.
But the great advances of recent decades in minority rights and antidiscrimination legislation owe little to academic multiculturalism (despite the claims it sometimes makes) and much to conventional, colour-blind liberalism. Moreover, academic multiculturalism’s uncritical championing of minority traditions, its neglect of majorities, and suspicion of integration, its continuing promotion of minority autonomy even after Britain has become a much more accommodating country, has left it politically marginalised.
The broader story of multiculturalism as a ‘live and let live’ approach to the management of minority – majority relationships can, however, count some successes. There is, indeed, some truth in Tariq Modood’s ‘ethnicity paradox’. By allowing the post-war minorities to find their own way to an understanding of the country and their own hybrid versions of what it is to be British, it has probably ended up binding them into the country more thoroughly than if they had been more vigorously pushed.
This has worked especially well for those minorities, such as Hindus and Sikhs from India, East African Asians and some black Africans, which have the right level of ‘cultural protection’ – a benign combination of supportive family networks, a powerful work ethic, a pro-education tradition and a cultural confidence that has also helped them to integrate successfully. But ‘laissez-faire’ has worked much less well for those groups such as Kashmiri Pakistanis, Bangladeshis and Somalis who were often poor and even illiterate when they arrived and brought with them a conservative, rural version of Islam and family networks that often locked them away from mainstream society.
Successful immigrant groups do not need an integration strategy, they already have one in their culture and their socio-economic starting points. Britain’s brand of multiculturalism has allowed the well-equipped to succeed and other groups to flounder and self-segregate. That is one reason why it is possible to hold apparently contradictory views about the multiculturalism record.
I would stand by that rather sweeping overview today but hope to elaborate some of those thoughts in relation to the discussion of the Bristol School of Multiculturalism (BSM) that has been, correctly, identified by Geoffrey Levey (2019).
Reading Levey’s piece, and the response from Varun Uberoi and Tariq Modood (2019), I am reminded of the avuncular kindness shown to me by Bhikhu Parekh in particular when I stumbled by accident into this field in the early 2000s. Despite my criticisms of the multiculturalist worldview, of which he was a world-renowned exponent, he was always unfailingly polite and patient in dealing with this newcomer journalist.
For that reason, I often attributed the ‘all things to all men’ intellectual fuzziness, that seems characteristic of the BSM, to a desire not to cause offence in a field of inquiry in which emotions can often run high.
An ethos and personal style of calmness and equanimity is, indeed, part of the honourable BSM tradition that has been bequeathed by Bhikhu, but the fuzziness is more deeply embedded in the ideas themselves.
So what are the distinguishing features of the BSM according to Levey? First, it is a muscular, assertive, identitarian form of multiculturalism that has grown ‘bottom up’ in response to political events, such as the Rusdhie affair, and supports a stronger group ethos than traditional liberal multiculturalism. Second it takes national identity and the importance of national belonging to ethnic minorities more seriously than liberal multiculturalism.
Uberoi and Modood do not really demur from this account though they take issue with some of Levey’s minor criticisms and seem to prefer to locate the roots of their thinking in the philosophy of Michael Oakeshott than in the fact that all three main BSM thinker – Parekh, Modood and Uberoi – come from visible minority backgrounds, as Levey points out, and thus feel the issues more personally than many of the white multicultural theorists like Will Kymlicka and Charles Taylor.
I am more critical than Levey and think that the BSM do not resolve the obvious tension between their stress on group rights and the centrality of individual rights in western liberalism. And nor do they resolve the equally obvious tension between a more assertive minority identity, along with hostility to alleged majority privilege, and yet the desire for a strong sense of inclusive national belonging too.
There is a strong stand of wishful thinking in their analysis and a reluctance to accept tradeoffs, moreover they have failed to develop a plausible idea of the ethnic majority and how it might respond to the rather large demands for change placed upon it. So far as I am aware the BSM do not draw on the empirical work of social psychologists in their thinking about groups, nor have they grappled with the political challenges presented by Louise Casey’s (2016) recent report on integration, nor Eric Kaufmann’s (2018) on declining majorities (see also the Ethnicities review symposium on Whiteshift: https://journals.sagepub.com/etna/symposium).
First, the liberalism question. How universally applicable are liberal ideas in modern Britain and how far should minorities be able to challenge them on issues like the role of women and free speech? The BSMers are not cultural relativists but are critical of aspects of western liberalism both on the standard grounds that it does not live up to its own principles but also on the more radical grounds that its principles – as spelt out in the UN Declaration of Human Rights (UNDHR) for example – are too western-centric and secular.
Parekh finds the UNDHR too supportive of free expression and unlimited property rights, and too hostile to arranged marriages. Modood is also critical of untrammeled free speech, and he and Uberoi appear to be supportive of polygamy in certain circumstances (Uberoi and Modood, 2019).
Legitimation for rejecting some current liberal norms appears to come from a belief in group rights. The traditional defence of difference or exotic practices is the Millian principle that they should only be stopped if they cause harm to others. This can be hard to measure. If a neighbourhood suddenly fills up with an immigrant group speaking a foreign language and bringing their own shops and cultural centres, the original residents may feel psychological harm.
But, in any case, a multiculturalist supporter of group rights could justify causing harm to someone – say forcing them to accept an arranged marriage against their will – by arguing on utilitarian grounds that the continued existence of the group culture is a source of happiness to many and depends on the persistence of such practices.
BSM reasoning on group rights appears somewhat arbitrary – who will decide which illiberal practices are acceptable, and justified by group rights, and which are not? It is also potentially authoritarian, a legitimation of the common sense of self-appointed traditional community leaders trying to prevent young people being lost to the corrupting liberalism of the host society. As Maajid Nawaz (2016) puts it: ‘Multiculturalism comes to mean diversity between, rather than within, groups’.
What about the second big cluster of questions relating to national culture, majority privilege and national identity?
BSMers want a positive politics of recognition to compensate for what Modood calls the demeaned identity minorities have had to suffer; minority rights for individuals is not sufficient. Moreover, they do not accept that the nation state can provide such recognition if it only reflects the interests of the dominant group. As Varun Uberoi has written:
If the state only establishes this culture’s religion in its political institutions, teaches only this culture’s history, uses only this culture’s language … it is treating minorities inequitably because they too are citizens but their cultures receive no such support. (Uberoi, 2008: 406)
Instead, BSMers want equality in connection with the symbolic dimensions of public culture, which means, for example, that they want the state to provide official recognition to all significant religions in the public sphere, not just the Church of England.
Many people, probably most, would be perfectly happy to see religious leaders from other faiths sitting in the House of Lords. And beyond that? A bias towards the historic majority is probably inevitable. You cannot cut up the state like a cake. Lots of things about it must be indivisible, like the rule of law or the national language. Or should significant minorities have their own separate legal/political/linguistic space and even Parliament, like Scotland within the United Kingdom?
The BSM in its rejection of liberal minority rights as inadequate is guilty of underestimating liberalism; majority domination is something that liberalism has wrestled with for a long time. Over several hundred years the principle of Cuius regio, eius religio – meaning the religion of the ruler was the religion of the ruled – gradually ceded to the liberal idea of minority religious rights. Catholics, in Britain for example, first became free to practise their religion at the end of the 17th century and then by the middle of the 19th century lost all significant social and political handicaps (though they never took the next, multiculturalist, step of demanding equal recognition of Catholicism with Protestantism!).
There are all sorts of anti-majoritarian checks and balances in a modern liberal state, not to mention the private space that minorities enjoy to practise their different religions and cultures. And it is simply wrong, or at least out of date, to claim, as Varun Uberoi and Tariq Modood do, that ‘cultural majorities often think that only they comprise the nation’ (2013: 24). Moreover, majorities themselves consist of many different minorities, often with conflicting interests or values.
BSMers are also in danger of getting on the wrong side of democracy and of being hostile to a sense of democratic ‘ownership’. The British state does not, of course, belong only to the ethnic majority. But the BSMers feel it is reserved too much for the majority and so want to dilute or undermine that sense of ownership. Consider this from Varun Uberoi, Tariq Modood and others in an essay on national identity: ‘…?the English majority?…?are privileged because they are dominant and it is difficult to justify why this dominance should continue’ (Uberoi et al., 2011: 207).
This is the wrong way round. Instead of trying to deny the majority its sense of ownership, the point is to include the minority in that feeling of ownership. The BSMers over-sensitivity to the ‘second class citizen’ status of minorities leads them to make unrealistic and destructive demands on the political status quo – a sort of multicultural over-reach.
This is another way of talking about multiculturalism’s ‘two-way street’ problem, the belief that too much of the onus of integration falls on the immigrant and too little on the host society. ‘Integrationists’, Bhikhu Parekh writes, ‘worry if immigrants retain a strong sense of commitment to their country of origin, reproduce its political controversies in their new environment, direct their philanthropic activities there’ (Parekh, 2005). This is true. But so apparently does Parekh, who writes: ‘a political community requires a common sense of belonging … a shared collective identity, a degree of mutual commitment and attachment, to underpin and nourish the practice of equal and active citizenship’ (Parekh, 2005).
The act of immigration is, normally, freely chosen. The immigrant has chosen to come to an already existing country with its own laws, history, language and so on. Those need to be respected and understood. The host society must offer equal rights to the newcomer, including the right to be different in a way that does not foster separation. Majorities do then adapt to accommodate minorities but it is a long-term and largely unconscious process, whereas the immigrant’s adaptation is shorter-term and more conscious. That is as it should be. But the stress placed on the ‘two-way street’ implies that the immigrant is doing the host society a favour by coming to the country and that its citizens should be grateful; a somewhat eccentric view of immigration. A far better metaphor was coined by Louise Casey (2016) when she talked about integration as like a motorway slip road, with minorities flowing from the slip road onto the motorway and members of the majority having to adjust their speed somewhat to allow them in.
The host society majority are, in any case, largely absent from the multiculturalism story. It is one of the blind spots of most of the BSMers, indeed multiculturalists in general, though Bhikhu Parekh and Tariq Modood (2014) have both publicly acknowledged the failure. Multiculturalism encourages, and wants funded from the public purse, the expression of minority ethnic identification, but has often been silent about, or hostile to, the expression of majority ethnic identification.
But white Europeans do not belong to a different species, like minorities they have patterns of life and traditions that many of them wish to preserve. If multiculturalism only addresses the concerns and promotes the identity of minorities – what Eric Kaufmann (2019) calls ‘asymmetrical multiculturalism’ – it will not help Britain to adapt successfully to the big demographic changes taking place. A successful integration strategy must engage the attention, consent and sympathy of the majority, particularly in the areas of high immigration, if the formal equalities offered to minorities by politics and law are to become the felt equality and acceptance of everyday life.
Majorities are the absent centre in most multicultural, and indeed liberal democratic, thinking. Political progress and much political theorising for the last two centuries has been focused on limiting and spreading power and thus, in part, on preventing majorities from abusing their dominance.
Two reasons are usually given in defence of this majority – minority asymmetry. First, majorities do not need special rights or protections in the way that minorities do because their culture and way of life is already pervasive, as Uberoi argues: the language that is spoken everywhere, the national ceremonies and rituals, the culture and history that is transmitted through the school system, and so on.
Second, while ethnic majorities may exist in some abstract sense of a shared ancestry there is no substantive majority culture or way of life, there is too much value and life-style diversity, too many different sociological tribes, in a country like modern Britain.
There is, however, a certain tension between the argument that majorities don’t really exist and that their culture is so pervasive that it needs no protection in the way that minorities are protected.
In any case I think the traditional defence of asymmetrical multiculturalism has been weakened by the current demographic facts: people of white European ancestry are already a minority in most major cities of North America and by 2050 the US, Canada and New Zealand will all be majority – minority with Western Europe and Australia following later in the century. In an increasing number of cities, towns and neighbourhoods in Britain today, the majority way of life and its institutions – the shops, pubs, churches – is no longer dominant.
The BSM represents an interesting historical compression of the two phases of minority inclusion. The first from the mid-19th century to the 1970s requested entry to the national club with equal rights and status. The second requested the right to be different as well as equal.
This is a legitimate claim but inevitably sets up a tension with the need for the common norms and high levels of trust that an inclusive national identity, encompassing majority and minorities, requires.
Too much difference especially of an illiberal, or at least non-liberal, kind, as advocated by the BSMers, will strain those common norms and lead to the parallel lives that we can witness in too many parts of Britain today.
On the one hand, BSMers, along with communitarian integrationists, agree that for a strong sense of national belonging it is not enough for people to merely obey the law and pay their taxes. On the other hand, they advocate fostering greater cultural difference than even other multiculturalists. Neatly resolving this contradiction in journal articles is not really sufficient (Modood, 2018; Uberoi, 2018).
As Levey points out, the effect of more separatist forms of minority life – and the constant stress on difference and diversity in the public culture – has quietly alienated many millions of citizens of all backgrounds and led to a desire to reduce immigration and possibly even contributed to the vote to leave the EU.
A successful multi – ethnic society is one in which minorities are seen as strengthening the national team (quite literally in the case of football) and blending into the national story, while retaining many of the beliefs and traditions that they came with.
What exactly the right balance is between different traditions and common norms is not easily susceptible to general rules, as Bhikhu Parekh has pointed out, but rather needs to be established and negotiated case by case, minority tradition by minority tradition. It is this concrete everyday negotiation that the BSM should be studying and reporting on.
There are better ways to manage our ageing society
 
 
Mick Jagger, still touring at the age of 75, is not so exceptional after all. He is an example of the so-called “young-old”, the growing number of people who extend an active and healthy middle age into their late Seventies.
Camilla Cavendish, former head of David Cameron’s policy unit, has written a lively and unusually optimistic book about the ageing populations of the West. She was inspired to write it partly by the sad story of her father who decided, at 50, that he was now old and whittled down his life even to the extent of no longer owning cats, which he loved, for fear that he might die and leave them homeless. Yet he lived in good health to 86.
In the gloomy narratives about ageing you seldom hear that, according to Cavendish, dementia rates have actually fallen by 20 per cent in the past 20 years in the UK. Moreover, it turns out that our brains keep developing throughout our lives. “We thought the brain became fixed in adulthood … We thought memory loss was inevitable… All this, it turns out, is wrong.” Meanwhile, science is starting to treat old age as a disease that can be beaten or at least slowed. We age because the DNA in our cells becomes progressively damaged by the process of cell division. This also makes us less resistant to disease. But scientists now think they can harness the body’s defences against this decay, and are experimenting on the global super-rich to see if it works.
Cavendish’s style is a bit breathless, which makes the book feel less authoritative than it is, but this is a well-informed policy manual on how an older society can be a better society. She believes we can harness the energy of the young-old while also dealing with many of the pathologies and costs of the ageing society (more than 40 per cent of the NHS budget is spent on the over-65s).
Her route to an extended, healthy middle age is the one we know already — eat your greens, take lots of exercise and have good relationships. But Cavendish’s global policy tour is full of noteworthy observations, from Japanese “silver centres” that keep the elderly feeling useful, to the inspiring Buurtzorg way of delivering elderly care in the Netherlands and the small investment in balance exercises for the elderly that can sharply reduce the incidence of falls (responsible for 10 per cent of all ambulance calls in the UK).
She is well aware of the social inequality in the ageing story and of the blight of obesity — “the new smoking” — which is gobbling up nine per cent of the NHS budget. Cavendish herself was partly responsible for the sugar tax and she is now directing her fire at the reluctance of GPs to intervene in the lifestyle choices of their patients.
And on the bigger-picture question of how society provides a decent old age for everyone and a functioning social care system without bankrupting the young, she wants to break the “triple lock” on indexing pensions and raise national insurance for all workers over 40, including pensioners (currently exempt). Japan and Germany have already done something similar.
There is a bigger question beneath the surface of this important book and it is this: for an older society to be a good society, do we need to raise the status of EQ (emotional intelligence) in relation to IQ? Our competitive, achievement-orientated societies, based around cognitive selection systems and measurable outcomes tend to devalue the caring function and the wisdom that comes with age. In most hospitals the least prestigious nursing function is in the geriatric department because it is less technological and goal-orientated than the acute specialities.
A greater respect for care, at all levels, is hard to express in policy terms but it may emerge anyway as a consequence of the evolving priorities of our older societies.
Tories must forget the liberal elite and try a dose of traditional values
 
Democracy is not in crisis but it is feeling battered in much of the rich world at present, and is experiencing a “demand and supply” problem. Voters have become more demanding, less deferential towards authority of all kinds, better educated and better armed (with the internet and social media).
At the same time, democracies are struggling to supply some of the good things that they have been associated with in the past — such as ever-improving standards of living, accountable decision-making (as globalisation removes more decisions from the nation) and a sense of a broad equalisation of status and esteem among citizens.
The last of those supply problems arises in our “diploma democracies” — political systems in which the main political parties and broader public sphere are increasingly dominated by the views and priorities of the highly educated and liberal-minded, notwithstanding a few tabloid newspapers and some angry corners of the internet.
 
Javid: first Muslim home secretary
Stable, open democracies require representation of all the main strands of opinion in a society, and if significant interests are excluded they will find a way of making themselves heard. This is what has happened with the great democratic “rebalancing” represented by Brexit, Donald Trump and continental European populism. Last week, a YouGov poll revealed that Nigel Farage’s fledgling Brexit Party could take as much as 27% of the vote in next month’s European elections. The Labour share was 22%. The Conservatives had just 15%.
This rebalancing is messy and disruptive and encounters resistance and pushback, and right now one of the main battlegrounds is within the Conservative Party.
Historically, the party has prided itself on being a broad church, absorbing all non-extreme views on the right of politics. This tradition appeared to be at least partly abandoned by the modernisation of the party by David Cameron and George Osborne, in which continuity with New Labour social policy was prioritised and socially conservative views were largely excluded and seen as politically damaging. (The grudging exceptions to this story were the ill-fated “tens of thousands” immigration target and, eventually, the referendum concession.)
This move by the Conservatives in effect excluded a large body of national opinion from parliament and continues to unbalance our politics. The militant “zero-tolerance” policy pursued by a small section of metropolitan opinion, which patrols the public conversation seeking out heretics to expel, aims to keep it unbalanced.
Yet a large body of people in this country hold opinions that are anathema to much of the progressive world-view: about 45% of people support the death penalty, about 65% think that immigration has been either too high or much too high, around half the population want to leave the EU, 62% of people think that Britain “sometimes feels like a foreign country”, the vast majority of women and men want modification, not abolition, of a gender division of labour, 58% of people think that newcomers are not integrating well and about one-third of the population say they would prefer to live in an area where almost everyone is from the same background.
Not all of these views are equally reasonable but, instead of excluding the people who hold them, would it not be preferable to try to persuade them to change their minds? Isn’t that how a democratic conversation is meant to function? Some of those views are gradually shifting in a more liberal direction as a result of the expansion of higher education and the generational shift, but not all of them.
Most people with such views are decent citizens, who are comfortable with “modern Britain” but tend to think it is changing too fast. And it cannot be said often enough that the vast majority also accept the broad outlines of race, gender and sexuality equality — though might argue with equality activists about what equality actually means.
There has been a steady drop in levels of racial prejudice since the 1980s. Only 1% of the population admit to being very prejudiced against people of different races (and they are almost all over 50), a negligible proportion say they do not want someone from a different race as a neighbour, less than 10% strongly disagree with gay marriage.
There is a constant insinuation that since the Brexit referendum, Britain has experienced a rising tide of violence and hatred against minorities. It is true that the number of hate crime incidents reported to police has been rising but that is partly because of greater encouragement to do so. More reliable is the Crime Survey of England and Wales, which measures people’s experiences of crime. It finds that hate crime has been on quite a sharp downward trend, not reversed in the 2016-18 period after the referendum (when there was a brief spike in harassment).
In any case, the partial suppression of legitimate small “c” conservative views in the public domain, reinforced by our first-past-the-post electoral system denying representation to overtly populist parties, has ended up giving us Brexit instead.
Contrast this with continental Europe which has absorbed, accommodated and domesticated populist opinion over the past 20 years. Several populist parties have taken part in government coalitions and in many cases, such as the Finns Party in Finland, have split and re-formed. The general direction of travel is towards less extreme views with experience of office tempering the views of leaders and most activists: consider the Freedom Party in Austria and the People’s Party in Denmark. Marine Le Pen’s National Rally has gradually moved away from support for France leaving the EU and not just because of Brexit.
The influence has, it is true, also worked the other way and populist parties have influenced mainstream ones, most notably in Holland, Austria, Denmark and the UK too (despite first-past-the-post). But this is surely democracy working its magic, not some kind of poison injected into the system.
One reason such socially conservative views are not going to fade away swiftly in this country is because they tend to be popular among the fast-growing and often religious ethnic minorities.
“There is a feeling that commonly held values are being eroded and disregarded by an elite that believes it knows better,” wrote one prominent ethnic minority MP, David Lammy, in his book Out of the Ashes about the 2011 riots, a book that opposed a ban on smacking and excoriated the hedonism, nihilism and hyper-individualism of the “double liberalism” of 1980s market economics plus a 1960s “anything goes” world-view. The Lammy of 2011 would surely have attracted the attention of the “zero-tolerance” Lammy of 2019.
A new electoral system based on proportional representation would, as in most of Europe, give a political voice to legitimate populism and social conservatism. But as this is not going to happen soon, the Conservative Party needs to return to its broad-church tradition, as the Brexit result seems to be mandating. This is not rocket science. The obvious thing would have been to balance a liberal move, such as gay marriage, with something for the more conservative-minded family lobby — such as the right of couples bringing up children together to share their tax allowances, thereby making it far easier for one parent to stay at home when children are young.
Instead, the Conservative leadership have found themselves cornered by a shallow, metropolitan world-view without the intellectual resources or political confidence to create the kind of liberal-conservative settlement that the country and their future success requires.
In the long run, the main party of the centre-right remains better equipped to lead that new settlement because it is easier for the Conservatives to shift left on economics, as they did at the last election, than it is for the Labour Party to shift right on culture in the direction of a David Lammy (2011 version) Blue Labour politics.
But escaping the clutches of the “zero-tolerance” sectarians will not be easy. Take the example of the Conservatives’ nervousness over the Muslim and Islamophobia question. The party has allowed itself to be painted as having an Islamophobia problem on the basis of a few prejudiced statements by local activists and councillors and an unscrupulous campaign against Sadiq Khan in the run-up to the London mayoral election in 2016. Baroness Warsi, the former party chairwoman, has played a central role in this as she attempts to turn herself into one of the key gatekeepers to Muslim Britain, describing the Muslim experience in the past decade as a “brutal” one.
Very few Muslims, who now make up about 5% of the population, are Tory voters or members and there is very little knowledge of Muslim communities and politics in the party. This has made it harder for the Tories to distinguish genuinely moderate and reform-minded Muslim leaders from those associated with the Islamist strain of politics that encourages separation and victimhood.
And it makes the party and country incapable, it seems, of having an honest discussion about aspects of Muslim life that make British society more wary towards fellow citizens of Muslim background than towards other minorities.
For Muslims do, on average, live more separate, and often poorer, lives than other minorities. Many of them come from traditional societies and often live in the most depressed parts of post-industrial Britain. Only about one third of Muslim women work, they are more likely than other minorities to speak a language other than English at home, rarely marry out of their religion, and still hold to norms that are more authoritarian, patriarchal and collectivist than the increasingly liberal, egalitarian and individualist British mainstream.
Moreover, British Muslim attitudes on homosexuality, blasphemy, religion in politics, even 9/11 conspiracy-theory accounts, tend to have more in common with global Muslim opinion than with the rest of British society.
Given that a large proportion of white British people have no Muslim friends and, from the Salman Rushdie affair via grooming gangs to jihadists acting in the name of Islam, Muslims are often associated with extremism, it is dismaying, but maybe not surprising, that 44% of white people say they would mind a little or a lot if a close relative married a Muslim (35% of British Pakistanis feel the same about a relative marrying a white person).
It is true that some Muslims do suffer discrimination and harassment, probably more than other minorities. But it is not Islamophobic to raise these issues of tension and difference. What we need is a deeper conversation about segregation and how to engineer more and better interaction across the Muslim/non-Muslim divide, plus a focus on the achievements of the growing Muslim middle class, rather than more intense policing of conversations at Tory cocktail parties.
The Conservative Party should stop believing what its enemies say about it, remind itself that it is the first party to appoint someone of Muslim background to one of the highest offices of state (the home secretary, Sajid Javid), and face down the zero-tolerance sectarians.
In fact, if the party is to rise to the challenge of leading the post-Brexit settlement across the country’s great value divides, it needs to apply that reasoning across Conservative thinking on all social and cultural matters.
IN NUMBERS
62% Proportion of people who think Britain “sometimes feels like a foreign country”
45% Proportion of people who back the death penalty
Can the Tories accommodate populism? - UnHerd
 
Democracy is not in crisis but it is feeling battered in much of the rich world at present, and is experiencing a ‘demand and supply’ problem. Voters have become more demanding, less deferential towards authority of all kinds, better educated and better armed (with the internet and social media).
At the same time, democracies are struggling to supply some of the good things that they have been associated with in the past – such as ever improving standards of living, accountable decision making (as globalisation removes more decisions from the nation) and a sense of a broad equalisation of status and esteem among citizens.
The last of those supply problems arises from the new system of status stratification by education, and in particular higher education, that has turned us into what has been described as “diploma democracies” — political systems in which the main political parties and broader public sphere are increasingly dominated by the views and priorities of the highly educated and liberal minded, notwithstanding a few tabloid newspapers and some angry corners of the internet.


Stable, open democracies require representation of all the main strands of opinion in a society, and if significant interests are excluded they will find a way of making themselves heard. This is what has happened with the great democratic ‘rebalancing’ represented by Brexit, Trump and continental European populism.
This rebalancing is messy and disruptive and encounters resistance and push-back, and right now one of the main battle grounds is the British Conservative party.
Historically, the party has prided itself on being a broad church, absorbing all non-extreme views on the Right of politics. This tradition appeared to be at least partly abandoned by the Cameron/Osborne modernisation of the party, in which continuity with New Labour social policy was prioritised, and socially conservative views were largely excluded and seen as politically damaging. (The grudging exceptions to this story were the ill-fated “tens of thousands” immigration target and, eventually, the referendum concession.)
This move by the Conservatives effectively excluded a large body of national opinion from Parliament and continues to unbalance our politics. The militant ‘zero tolerance’ policy pursued by a small niche of metropolitan opinion, which patrols the public conversation seeking out heretics to expel, aims to keep it unbalanced.
Consider, as evidence, the recent sacking by a Conservative government of Roger Scruton, Britain’s most eminent conservative philosopher, for his tendentious comments about Muslims. And the ridiculous comments from David Lammy MP, the Nigel Farage of the Left, on Sunday about how retweeting something from a German populist party is an expression of Nazism.


Yet a large body of opinion in this country hold opinions that are anathema to much of the progressive worldview: about 45% of people support the death penalty, about 65% think that immigration has been either too high or much too high, around half the population want to leave the EU, 62% of people think that Britain “sometimes feels like a foreign country”, the vast majority of women and men want modification not abolition of a gender division of labour, 58% of people think that newcomers are not integrating well, about one third of the population say they would prefer to live in an area where almost everyone is from the same background and 44% of whites say they would mind a little or a lot if a close relative married a Muslim.
Not all of these views are equally reasonable but, instead of excluding the people who hold them, would it not be preferable to persuade them to change their minds? Isn’t that how a democratic conversation is meant to function? Some of those views are gradually shifting in a more progressive direction as a result of the expansion of higher education and the generational shift, but not all of them.
Most people with such views are decent citizens, who are comfortable with ‘modern Britain’ but tend to think it is changing too fast. And it cannot be said often enough that the vast majority also accept the broad outlines of race, gender and sexuality equality – though might argue with equality activists about what equality actually means.
Academics have shown a steady drop in levels of racial prejudice since the 1980s. Only one per cent of the population now admit to being very prejudiced against people of different races (and they are almost all over 50), a negligible proportion say they do not want someone from a different race as a neighbour, less than 10% strongly disagree with gay marriage.


Moreover, the constant insinuation, repeated by David Lammy on Sunday, that since Brexit, Britain has experienced a rising tide of violence and hatred against minorities is contradicted by the only reliable piece of evidence we have: the Crime Survey of England and Wales finds that hate crime is on quite a sharp downward trend, including in the period covering Brexit (when there was a brief spike in harassment).
Nevertheless, the partial suppression of legitimate small-c conservative views in the public domain, reinforced by our first-past-the-post electoral system denying representation to overtly populist parties, has ended up giving us Brexit instead.
Contrast this with continental Europe which has absorbed, accommodated and domesticated populist opinion over the last 20 years. Several populist parties have now taken part in government coalitions and in many cases, such as the Finns in Finland, have split and re-formed. The general direction of travel is towards less extreme views with experience of office tempering the views of leaders and most activists: consider the Freedom party in Austria and the People’s party in Denmark. Marine Le Pen’s National Rally has gradually moved away from support for France leaving the EU and not just because of Brexit.


The Italian populist coalition has also just provided a good recent example of this domestication. Both the 5 Star Movement and Lega Nord were seduced by the anti-MMR vaccine cult and had promised to abolish a law banning children from attending school unless they had received jabs against 10 diseases. But when the 5 Star education minister was faced with an outbreak of measles in schools the party abruptly dropped its opposition to vaccination and in effect adopted the policy it had previously repudiated.
The influence has, it is true, worked the other way too and populist parties have influenced mainstream ones, most notably in the Netherlands, Austria, Denmark and the UK too (despite first past the post). But this is surely democracy working its magic, not some kind of poison injected into the system. One reason such socially conservative views are not going to fade away swiftly in this country is because they tend to be popular among the fast-growing and often religiously observant ethnic minorities.
“There is a feeling that commonly held values are being eroded and disregarded by an elite that believes it knows better,” wrote one prominent ethnic minority MP by the name of David Lammy in his book Out of the Ashes about the 2011 riots, a book that opposed a ban on smacking and excoriated the hedonism, nihilism and hyper-individualism of the ‘double liberalism’ of 1980s market economics plus a 1960s ‘anything goes’ worldview. The David Lammy of 2011 would surely have attracted the attention of the ‘zero tolerance’ policemen of 2019.
A constitutional reform programme that would give us some variant of proportional representation and so a political voice in Parliament for legitimate populism and social conservatism is not going to happen soon. Which means that the Conservative party must return to its broad-church tradition, as the Brexit result seems to be mandating.

This is not rocket science. George Osborne, who was tweeting gleefully in support of the sacking of Roger Scruton, has a reputation as a fearsome political strategist but he must take quite a large part of the blame for his party’s current slump in popularity, as not only the author of an excessive austerity but also of a high-handed liberalisation of the party that turbo-charged Ukip and led to Brexit.
The obvious thing would have been to balance a liberal move, such as gay marriage, with something for the more conservative-minded family lobby – such as the right of couples bringing up children together to share their tax allowances thereby making it far easier for one parent to stay at home when children are young.
Instead, the Conservative leadership have found themselves cornered by a shallow, metropolitan worldview without the intellectual resources or political confidence to create the new kind of liberal-conservative settlement that the country and their future success requires.
In the long run, the main party of the centre-Right remains better equipped to lead that new settlement because it is easier for the Conservatives to shift Left on economics, as they did at the last election, than it is for the Labour party to shift Right on culture in the direction of a David Lammy (2011) Blue Labour politics.
But escaping the clutches of the ‘zero tolerance’ sectarians will not be easy, as exemplified by the Scruton episode, which speaks to a larger nervousness about the Muslim and Islamophobia question.


The party has allowed itself to be painted as having an Islamophobia problem on the basis of a few prejudiced statements by local activists and councillors and an unscrupulous campaign against Sadiq Khan. Sayeeda Warsi, the former party chairman, has played a central role in this as she attempts to turn herself into one of the key gatekeepers to Muslim Britain, describing the Muslim experience in the past decade as a “brutal” one. The BBC and other news outlets uncritically recycle the claim in part to provide balance to the anti-Semitism charge against the Labour party.
Very few Muslims, who now make up about 6% of the population, are Tory voters or members and there is very little knowledge of Muslim communities and politics in the higher ranks of the party. This has made it harder for the party to distinguish genuinely moderate and reform-minded Muslim leaders from those associated with the Islamist strain of politics that encourages separation.
And it makes the party and country incapable, it seems, of having a reasonable discussion about aspects of Muslim life that makes British society more wary towards their fellow citizens of Muslim background than towards other minorities.
For Muslims do, on average, live more separate, and often poorer, lives than other minorities. Many of them come from traditional societies and now often live in the most depressed parts of post-industrial Britain: 46% of the Muslim population lives in the 10% most deprived local authorities. Only about one third of Muslim women work, they are more likely than other minorities to speak a language other than English at home, rarely marry out, and still hold to norms that are more authoritarian, patriarchal and collectivist than the increasingly liberal, egalitarian and individualist British mainstream.
Moreover, British Muslim attitudes on homosexuality, blasphemy, religion in politics, even conspiracy theory accounts of 9/11, tend to have more in common with global Muslim opinion than with the rest of British society.
Given that a large proportion of British people have no Muslim friends – in 2004, this was 90% – and, from the Rushdie affair via grooming gangs to jihadists acting in the name of Islam, Muslims are often associated with extremism, it may not be so surprising that, as I described above 44% of whites say they would mind a little or a lot if a close relative married a Muslim (35% of British Pakistanis feel the same about a relative marrying a white person).


It is true that some Muslims do suffer discrimination and harassment, probably more than other minorities, but there is no evidence that it is increasing. And it is not Islamophobic to raise these real issues of tension and difference. What we need is a deeper conversation about segregation and how to engineer more and better interaction across the Muslim-non-Muslim divide, plus a focus on the achievements of the growing Muslim middle class, rather than more intense policing of conversations at Tory cocktail parties.
The Conservative party should stop believing what their enemies say about them, remind themselves that they are the first party to appoint someone of Muslim background to one of the highest offices of state, and face down the zero tolerance sectarians.
In fact, if the party is to rise to the challenge of leading the post-Brexit settlement across the country’s great value divides, it needs to apply that reasoning across Conservative thinking on all social and cultural matters.
Brexit has broken the system – prepare for a European-style realignment of politics
Watching our exasperating Brexit dispute from the safe distance of Vienna, where I was staying for the past month, it struck me how strangely Europeanised our party politics has become, with the prospect of it becoming even more so as our party system reconfigures.
In one respect, however, we remain proudly uncontinental. Talking to Austrian friends about the great Brexit “mess”, I detected, along with a fair amount of Schadenfreude, a sneaking admiration for the democratic theatrics that the House of Commons has been providing.
In a Europe of often sterile national parliaments – where people tend to read out pre-prepared texts and vote along the lines of deals agreed between party leaders – our domestic drama has provided a refreshing alternative. Since the 2016 referendum we have been having an intense family argument and, unlike the gilets jaunes challenge to the authority of the French state, with little violence.
That said, the lack of a government majority since the 2017 election has had the effect of “Europeanising” party politics by creating a kind of nascent multi-party democracy within the tottering structures of the old two party, first-past-the-post, system.
The case for the traditional two-party system is that it provides decisive government, albeit at the price of disenfranchising quite large parts of the electorate and making it harder for new political forces to emerge. By contrast European-style multi-party democracy with various forms of proportional representation (PR) is more fluid and open but tends to hand out vetoes to more political players and can therefore lead to stasis.
So May’s Withdrawal Agreement has been blocked not only by Labour but also by the SNP, the DUP, the Liberal Democrats, the inner Tory party ERG grouping, and could in plausible scenarios even be blocked by the new Independent Group of MPs.
European political classes have developed over decades the skill of cross-party consensus building to unlock vetoes that our own adversarial political class lacks, admittedly exacerbated by two further factors: the rigid political style of Theresa May and the fact that the main opposition party is led by members of an unclubbable, far-Left political tradition.
A further Europeanisation looks likely as the parties reconfigure away from socio-economic class politics to socio-cultural identity politics. Initially this is likely to be a top-down movement, exemplified by The Independent Group of MPs, as the parties adjust to the fact that less than a third of voters strongly identify with the party they voted for in 2017 but more than three-quarters strongly identify with their Leave or Remain vote.
Whatever happens, the Tory party is destined to become the Brexit party. But that means a more overt working class-middle class alliance clustering around the sort of “hidden majority” policies represented by the 2017 Tory manifesto (shorn of its suicide clauses about social care). That means: market-friendly but social democratic in economics, broadly liberal in politics and somewhat conservative in social and cultural matters.
That begs many questions, of course. What is “somewhat conservative” for one thing? It would surely not mean reversing gay marriage, for example, but it might mean greater respect for more traditionalist, Roger Scruton-esque sentiments in social policy and, say, making it easier for one parent to stay at home for longer when children are very young.
But a low immigration, high-ish public spending party that throws money at universal credit, builds more social housing and nationalises social care (to save middle class people having to sell their houses) would be a potentially popular British version of Christian Democracy, speaking for the suburbs, smaller towns and countryside.
I happened to see this nascent potential future Tory party on show at George Freeman’s Big Tent political event last September when Liz Truss, the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, was shouted down by Tory activists in a debate about the future of capitalism for taking the traditional low-tax, free market line.
Meanwhile, the more socially liberal voting bloc based in London, the metropolitan centres and university towns will be divided between some version of the old Blair/Cameron status quo – a Chuka Ummuna/Nick Boles double act – and the new model Labour party which will be aggressively “woke” socially and statist in economics.
Curiously, this leaves little room for the old Thatcherites who occupy the free market, low tax, pro-business but socially traditionalist corner of the graph, what one might call the golf-club voters. They might have to vote for the Nigel Farage party. The other disenfranchised group is young people who are militant about sex and race equality but don’t like a big state and high taxes.
Although one can see the outlines of these three parties already emerging, lasting political reform tends to come from the bottom up not the top down: see the emergence of the Labour Party in the early 20th century or more recently the Five Star Movement in Italy. A new grand constitutional settlement, including greater representation for English voters and a reconsideration of PR-type voting systems, would hasten bottom up reform but does not seem imminent.
Yet it seems pretty obvious that our two party, first-past-the-post system belongs to an earlier age. Continental PR systems are appropriate for a more fluid age with a more diverse and less class-conscious electorate.
Moreover, they have more successfully absorbed, accommodated and domesticated legitimate populism by giving it a political voice. Once given political responsibility, some populist parties, like The Finns in Finland, have split between pragmatists and true-believers. Others, like the Freedom party in Austria, have been largely co-opted and de-fanged by the larger centre-Right coalition party.
A good recent example of this has come in Italy where the Five Star Movement (and Liga Nord) have both been seduced by the anti-MMR vaccine cult. But when the Five Star education minister was faced with thousands of school children going down with measles, the party abruptly dropped its opposition to vaccinations.
People used to say, rather smugly, that populism had been held at bay in this country by our first past the post voting system. But the truth is it just took a different and, ultimately perhaps, more disruptive form, by focusing on our exit from the EU.
But changing the voting system can only get you so far. The big problem that we are facing in the future is that it is easier to fashion compromises over socio-economic differences than it is over socio-cultural ones like national identity, immigration and the pace of social change.
The 1970s socio-economic log-jam was eventually broken by the arrival of Margaret Thatcher. The value impasse between liberalism and social conservatism cannot be broken in the same way. It must instead be transcended by a political leadership that can build bridges between the two ways of thinking and being.
Why you’ll never be colour blind
 
 
If you are reading this on a Tube or in a train carriage, maybe you sat down next to someone of the same race when there were closer empty seats next to someone of a different race.
A dark-skinned British-Indian friend tells me he often experiences being shunned in this way. He says it doesn’t really bother him, and it means he has more space to stretch out, but he is also aware that it is an example of the unconscious biases that in other circumstances — such as applying for a job — might have more negative consequences.
This book, by the black American psychologist Jennifer Eberhardt, is about these unconscious biases, weaving together observations on the science of human categorisation and stereotyping with personal histories and anecdotes drawn mainly from the black-white divide in the US.
This is not another attack on white people for their relentless bigotry. “Implicit bias,” writes Eberhardt, “is not a new way of calling someone a racist… it is a kind of distorting lens that’s a product of both the architecture of our brain and the disparities in our society.”
She reassures white readers by telling a story about her own inability as a girl to distinguish the white faces around her when she moved from her all-black school to a much whiter one. What scientists call the “other-race effect” — the fact that we are better at recognising familiar faces — arises from the “fusiform face area” of the brain that establishes in- and out-group distinctions.
Race activists might feel uneasy at her apparent legitimation of the “they all look alike” sentiment, along with her belief in the unavoidability of stereotyping and the claim that colour blindness is neither possible nor desirable.
But when she applies her thinking about implicit bias to the way US police officers, including black ones, operate under pressure, her data and anecdotes (including about her own treatment) will shock any reasonable-minded person. And she provides a depressingly persuasive explanation of America’s mass incarceration system, and why a hugely disproportionate 40 per cent of the 2.1 million prisoners are black: the stereotyping and initial biases in arrests, compounded by pre-trial detention, the fact that some people end up pleading guilty to crimes they did not commit, and then the employment problems faced by those with a criminal record.
Moreover, the wrong face can significantly increase the likelihood of a death sentence (and the right kind of unthreatening “baby face” black features can increase your chances of promotion).
She does not, however, distinguish adequately between our “thinking fast” implicit biases, exacerbated by social media, and the deeper historical and socio-economic biases that inform our group stereotyping.
After all, if implicit biases apply as much to the experience of Indian or Chinese Americans, how come they have transformed their group stereotypes into something far more positive within a few generations in a way that black Americans have not? Is blackness itself somehow a problem in majority-white societies or is it the history of slavery and the depressed socio-economic position of so many black Americans?
Nor does Eberhardt tell us what to do with the realities that underlie some of those stereotypes. Knowing, in her words, “that a disproportionate amount of violent crime is committed by young black men”, is it racist stereotyping or a safety-first instinct to cross the road at night if a group of young black men are walking towards you?
Reading this book makes me more sympathetic to the idea of often-mocked diversity training to make us more aware of implicit biases. But beyond striving for self-awareness and open-mindedness it is not clear what it has to offer on top of the good practice and law that already stands between our unconscious and actions in the public domain.
And Eberhardt herself admits that too little effort has been made to measure the results of diversity training, a growing industry that will surely be given a further boost by her important contribution.
Gove signals the end of the Left-Right divide - The Post
 
One of the best political speeches by a senior practising politician that I can recall was delivered by Michael Gove at Ditchley Park on Saturday evening. I should acknowledge that he did make favourable mention of my book The Road to Somewhere and its analysis of the value divides that have been driving much western politics in recent years, so I am not completely neutral, but this speech should be regarded as the definitive death-knell for Left-Right spectrum thinking in modern politics.
Here is a leading Tory politician, despised by the Left and leading a government routinely described as nativist/xenophobic and run by entitled, privileged men with no interest in the experience of ordinary people. And yet he says his “driving mission in politics, is to make opportunity more equal.” The model politician he praises is FDR, America’s most Left-wing president who for a few decades turned the US into something more like a European social democracy. Large passages of the speech could easily have been written by a centre-Left politician. For example:
We want to reform capitalism, re-invigorate support for democracy, get Government working better for all while building more inclusive societies… There are too many whose economic interests, and whose values, have been forgotten. In our unequal times we must attend increasingly to those who have suffered from neglect and condescension and to those whose lives have been scarred by racism and prejudice. Our contemporary work of reform must put them first… improving exam performance for children from under-performing ethnic minorities, enhancing the ability of prisons to rehabilitate prisoners or shifting our economic model to see higher returns to labour and fewer opportunities for rent-seeking.
- Michael Gove
None of this is should be surprising either from Gove himself, the radical reformer, or from the Tory party as a whole which took a social democratic turn under Theresa May and has gone even further with the current levelling up and let-spending-rip agendas. Yet here is one of the paradoxes of British politics: it has become a tired old cliché to declare that Left v Right is dead and yet there they still are, trundling along embedded as ever in our political minds.
Why is this? In part because the mainstream Left has been so focused on framing Brexit as a lurch to the Right (even far-Right) and also because it needs an idea of Tory uncaring, free-market dogma to sustain its own righteousness; that the onward march of Tory leftism has been scarcely noted in the liberal media. Meanwhile the more Conservative-friendly media is still not sure what to make of the bonfire of old free market dogmas. The result is that too few people want to see the end of Left v Right.
The meat of the speech was actually the machinery of government/Dominic Cummings agenda which describes our supposedly Rolls-Royce senior civil service as more like a Trabant-like impediment to the goals stated above: the lack of mathematical and data skills at the top, the damaging generalist obsession with shifting people around, and the well-known delivery failures and buck-passing. This will be familiar to anyone who has read the Cummings blog or followed the debate on reforming the machine. Gove, who has the advantage of experience in five different departments, also wants the people running the machine to be less southern, less middle class and less reliant on social science qualifications.
All of this seems an eminently sensible sort of radicalism, and when combined with Brexit and a greater respect for the somewhat socially conservative values of many of those who do not climb the cognitive meritocracy ladder, it could be said to represent the hidden majority in rich democracies — social democratic in economics and a bit to the Right on cultural issues.
The trouble is that the broader political and administrative class which has seen a surprising amount of ideological and even personnel continuity all the way from John Major, via Blair/Brown and Cameron/Osborne, to Theresa May, is deeply out of sympathy with the new centre defined by Johnson/Gove/Cummings. As Gove points out: “Almost every arm of Government, and those with powerful voices within it, seemed estranged from the majority in 2016.”
The majority at last has a Government that broadly represents its views but it is one of the least experienced cabinets of recent times and with very few people getting behind it at the top of the bureaucracy. Gove describes a popular and radical programme, but are there enough radicals to make it a reality?
Facts vs feelings in the BLM debate - UnHerd
 
George Floyd’s appalling murder and the global outrage it triggered has evolved into a broader protest about black disadvantage and racism in western countries.
Many people of goodwill, including many white people, have joined marches in the UK. Young friends of mine who have been on the marches tell me I should tread carefully writing about the issue because I cannot know what it feels like to be black in Britain.
That is true. Yet if we are going to have an honest conversation about the condition of the black minority, then we should consider facts as well as feelings.
The most important fact is that there is no single black minority. Over recent decades some ethnic minority groups have been climbing the ladder faster than others. That divergence story can now be told about Britain’s black minority itself, which in recent decades has generally experienced less good outcomes than most other big UK minorities.

The UK doesn’t yet have a US-style black middle class, but we are getting there. More than 35% of British-Caribbean men are now in the top two social classes (out of seven) up from just 11% in the 1990s, British-African men lag behind at 28%. On average poverty is higher and accumulated wealth a lot lower for black people, but pay is now only a bit below average.
Black children now slightly outperform whites in the Government’s Progress 8 school measures. Young black people are more likely to go to university than whites, 41% to 31%, albeit only 9% go to elite Russell Group universities compared to 12% of whites. Black people are well represented at the top in sport, music the arts, and the public sector, while under-represented in business and academia.
So far, so relatively good, especially given that most (not all) of Britain’s 1.8m black people trace their roots back a few generations to mainly poor, and poorly educated, immigrants from the Caribbean and Africa.
There is, however, a substantial minority of the black population stuck to the bottom of British society, (14% of black people live in households with persistent low income compared with 8% of whites). They are likely to live in public housing in inner city London or other big cities. Their lives are shorter, more violent, poorer and less healthy than other black people and almost all other groups in Britain. It is their pain, and anger, that is easily connected to a narrative of slavery and humiliation, to historic white stereotypes of inferiority, as well as to more recent stories of police brutality.
Racial disadvantage is a reality but a complex one. It affects some groups more than others, and often overlaps with social class disadvantage. And the extent to which it is caused by white people is moot, given the apparent decline in racial prejudice of recent decades. It is possible to have racial inequality without a society full of racists. Less than 1% of the population admit to hard racist attitudes, though around a quarter admit to some prejudice, and back in 2006 only 1.3% of 35-54 year old whites objected strongly to having a black boss. The British Social Attitudes survey has not asked the question since but if previous trends had continued, and even allowing for some flattening out of the decline, that figure would now be close to zero.

There is no widely agreed definition of racism but prejudice clearly operates on a wide spectrum and manifests itself in many different ways. Even allowing for the fact that racism is a central taboo of British society, and that people therefore may not give honest answers in surveys, the evidence says it has been declining in recent decades. Yet many people on the anti-racist Left maintain that it has merely become less visible, a view with considerable support in parts of the establishment.
I have taken an interest in race issues for 15 years (seven years ago I published a book partly on the subject, The British Dream) and I know that the data, with one or two important caveats, tells a generally positive story of minority, including black, advance. (An enduring image for me of the Covid-19 crisis and British openness is Chancellor Rishi Sunak talking to BBC economics editor Faisal Islam about an NHS in which 35% of consultants are British Asians.) I also listen to a range of black and Asian voices, not just those BLM sympathisers who have dominated the airwaves in the past fortnight.
Everybody selects facts to suit — and make — their case, but we are currently seeing an epidemic of politicised selection (including in a Times editorial on Saturday on black advancement that uncritically recycled activist claims about disparities).
There is also the context of historical disadvantage versus current disadvantage. Black Caribbean households have on average just one third the assets of white households, and only one third of all black people own their own home compared to two-thirds of whites. But you would expect some disparity, given a general starting point a few generations back of a poor newcomer without assets or much education, and it is noticeable that 40% of Caribbeans now own their own home compared with just 20% of Africans who have been here a shorter time.

When BLM supporters use evidence to support their arguments for systemic racism it usually runs like this: take the black population in the UK of 3% and then point to big over-representation in bad things (prison population, stop and search, deaths in custody, being sectioned, unemployment) and under-representation in good things (top professions, Oxbridge, football management, Parliament, corporate boardrooms).
This is statistically naive. The over-representation of black people in prison, at 12% of the total, should not be looked at in relation to the total black population but rather to those involved in serious crime: in recent years black people accounted for around 20% of robbery convictions and 15% of murder convictions. Apparent disproportionality also falls away for stop and search (when you focus on who is on the streets in the places it happens), deaths in custody and being sectioned, but not for higher rates of unemployment (which was at least moving in the right direction prior to the crisis).


Under-representation in good things is a more mixed picture. There are some real issues here and Britain needs to do better, especially in business (just 0.9% of the top 20 executives in FTSE 100 companies are black). Indeed, one source of the alienation of some black BLM protesters may be frustration that after getting decent degrees they are not achieving the high-status employment they expected. The same is true of a lot of young whites too, sometimes seen as the driver behind Corbynism.
Looked at in this light, the anger of the black BLM activists might be seen, in part, as the growing pains of the expanding black middle class. And both anecdotal and labour market evidence does suggest that recruitment and promotion is harder for young professional black people than white ones.
Stereotypes and unconscious biases do linger on, possibly reinforced by AI. They persist even in the mainly progressive world of education. A friend of mine who teaches at an inner-city school in London, with mainly minority pupils, says he notices that white teachers get promoted faster than black ones. In some cases, he says, that is clearly because the whites deserve it, in other cases he is not so sure. But it is also worth remembering that stereotypes change when the social reality changes; in my lifetime, the dominant stereotype for both Irish and Indian people has been completely transformed.

Nearly 40 years ago in Brixton mainly working class British Caribbean young men rioted over openly racist policing, today we have black graduates (a mix of British Caribbean and British African) angry over unconscious bias and slower promotion. That surely represents some kind of progress.
And happily the black elite is now large enough to accommodate real intellectual variety. In the recent row over the review of ethnic minority Covid-19 deaths the mainstream black view, that they must be caused by poverty and racism, was challenged by leading black figures like Trevor Phillips and Tony Sewell who argued that we should consider all evidence, including the role of conditions that especially afflict minorities such as diabetes, and follow where it leads.


Sewell featured in an issue of Prospect magazine I edited in 2010 called Rethinking Race. As did Munira Mirza, now head of the No10 policy unit, who summed up part of the rethink, saying: “Of course, racism still exists, but things have improved to a point where many ethnic minority Britons do not experience it as a regular feature in their lives.”
To repeat, none of these people say there is no black racism here. But they would, I think, challenge the BLM story in three main ways. First, if you want to help disadvantaged black people focus on practical solutions to inner city problems: more investment in anti-knife crime units; more black police officers (just 1% at present); greater efforts to deal with obesity levels and chronic bad health; a national volunteering scheme for inner-city school mentors. Second, do not ignore the self-inflicted wounds of violent crime, fatherless families, anti-educational “acting white” culture. Third, reject victim culture which can discourage young blacks from aiming higher, using racism as an excuse for any setback.
Shaun Bailey, the black Tory London mayoral candidate, likes to talk about tackling black disadvantage and widening access to the elite as a means of strengthening the national team. This is the kind of language that people of all races can happily support. But a worrying aspect of recent events is the gulf between white elite reaction to BLM and the white majority who are likely to be looking on with some bemusement.
Consider this routine statement of anti-racist political activism: “We must be clear in the workplace that racism and inequality are enemies we must keep fighting; that racism takes many forms; that privilege takes many forms. It’s why the Black Lives Matter movement is so important. And that it’s not enough to be passively anti-racist; we must take a stand, and we must take action.” And then consider the fact that it was written a week ago by Richard Heaton, the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Justice. A more establishment position is hard to imagine. BLM is a broad movement without much by way of programme or hierarchy but to the extent that it has a manifesto it calls for the de-funding of the police and its retreat from black communities (the opposite of what most of those communities want).
Elite reaction in the media was also captured by Andrew Marr on his Sunday programme asking black British historian David Olusoga to tell him: “What should white people be doing to change our lives… to make this a better country for black people.” Olusoga didn’t really have an answer but talked about the subtle ways that black people are psychologically damaged by systemic racism, in language for example.
Marr’s instinct is, of course, a perfectly proper one but it reinforces the general assumption that whites are the central problem — which ends up placing too much focus on the white conscience, with even some suggestion of white people asking for absolution from black people.
I worry that these debates are being heard very differently in white middle England. White privilege tends to be a concern of privileged whites. As Barack Obama put it: “Most working-class and middle-class white Americans don’t feel that they have been particularly privileged by their race.”

And in the UK, BLM’s attempt to unilaterally rearrange the national heritage is a potential recruiting sergeant to the normally minuscule far-right. More worrying is the danger that it will drive an even bigger wedge between a progressive establishment, happy to embrace much of the BLM perspective, and the bulk of non-privileged, non-guilty, whites, who are not taking the hiring or promotion decisions that might disadvantage black people, and resent being labelled as racists. At a time when we should be trying to make it more, not less, comfortable to talk about race, they are likely to be more on their guard on this issue, and in the presence of black individuals they do not know.
Olusoga says we should listen to young black British BLM marchers when they say they see echoes of George Floyd’s experience in their own lives. But, to put it politely, there is an intense subjectivism here. About 1,000 people are killed every year by the US police, one quarter black. Three people in the UK were killed by the police in 2018 and none of them were black. Over the last 10 years 163 people have died in or following police custody, 13 were black. But taking the category of all those who have been arrested a white person is more likely to die in custody.
Black people in the US are closer in time to a truly brutal official racism and remain far more segregated. In the UK, nearly half of Caribbean men partner with white women and the mixed-race ethnic group is the fastest growing, a living symbol of integration.
False or exaggerated claims of victimhood are all too easy to make in the current environment but they are damaging to the cause of both equality and rational argument. And the whole debate is disfigured by disproportionality. The gravitational force of ideology focuses the attention of young radicals on a small problem, at least in the UK, of police harassment, while ignoring some far larger problems in the black community.
How does attacking white people for unintended micro-aggressions help a middle-aged black woman living in the inner city? She belongs to probably the unhappiest group in Britain. The father of her children is statistically likely to be absent, she lives in fear that violence will devour her son, she commutes a long distance to a low-paid job, she has more than a 50% chance of suffering from high blood pressure and obesity. When BLM comes up with some solutions to her problems the country should listen carefully.
Peoples’ feelings and perceptions are important, but they are just one piece of evidence in this jigsaw. And if we accept that the perceptions of young black BLM supporters is the only truth that matters then it just becomes my tribe versus your tribe and we are truly lost.
Out of kilter:  ’s Head, Hand, Heart and the modern imbalance of skills
 
 
After a COVID-blighted final term at Edinburgh University my son is training to be a primary school teacher. Many other graduates are looking out on a more uncertain future. But behind the disruption caused by the pandemic looms a bigger misalignment of skills and human expectations that is starting to impact most rich societies.
The notion that a good degree and prestigious professional job is the root to security and success is still alive and well in the minds of most parents, and indeed policy makers. Yet for many graduates it is a dwindling likelihood. It turns out that the knowledge economy does not need so many knowledge workers. The era of the steady expansion of the class of academically trained professionals is drawing to a close. 
In developed countries, membership of the top two social classes, the higher and lower ends of the professional/managerial class, has typically grown to around one third of the adult population: as the economy demanded more highly educated workers, higher education expanded to provide them. That growth in professional jobs has now almost ground to a halt.
 
And even before artificial intelligence starts shredding the middling and lower-end cognitive jobs in law, accountancy, administration, medicine and so on, there has been a sharp decline in the pay of the average graduate job in most rich countries as diminishing returns set in.
Already many graduates fill GBP 22,000-a-year, clerical-type jobs – often the same jobs done by their non-graduate peers. Academics Phil Brown and Hugh Lauder talk about “digital Taylorism”, the routinisation of cognitive work that once demanded thought and judgement. 
A broad graduate elite is preferable to the narrow one when I went to college. But without the high status jobs that its members expect, it’s creating a crisis of disappointed expectations that has probably contributed to radical eruptions such as the Bernie Sanders movement.
Moreover, the unprecedented investment in research universities has not prevented the recent decline in productivity, and some economists even argue the decline may be partly caused by the growth of the cognitive bureaucracy. At the same time, we have a crisis of recruitment in many corners of the public care economy and in middle-skill technical jobs and skilled trades.
The idea of a successful life has become too focused on one set of human skills, and we have created just one big ladder up into it: the modern university.
Meanwhile, the idea of meritocracy itself has taken a battering following new books from Daniel Markovits, Michael Sandel and others. All of them stress the impossibility of a fair meritocracy in any free society that allows families to pass on advantage. But they also highlight the inherent undesirability of turning society into a competition in which the most able win and many of the rest feel like failures. We still need selection by merit into relevant jobs, especially top jobs, but that does not require a society that disproportionately values those adept at manipulating information.
My own new book—Head, Hand, Heart—echoes some of these ideas but places more emphasis on the imbalance that modern societies have created between the cluster of aptitudes corresponding to those three body parts. We have made Head academic ability too much the gold standard of esteem while status, reward and meaning have drained away from many Hand (manual/technical) and Heart (caring/nurturing) functions, contributing to the political alienation of recent years. 
 
The idea of a successful life has become too focused on one set of human skills, and we have created just one big ladder up into it: the modern university. Until recently there were more small ladders, and a wider notion of a successful life.
Of course, high intelligence is as useful today as ever: we need knowledge creators to develop a COVID vaccine and work out how to suck carbon out of the atmosphere. But most academically trained people are not creating new knowledge, and there is less innovative thinking in most lower level cognitive jobs; there will, in any case, be fewer such jobs in the future. However, there will be more jobs in care and technical functions requiring less of an academic training and more emotional and practical intelligence. There is more than one scale of human worth.
When I started writing my book I thought the idea of spreading status more evenly between Head, Hand and Heart was idealistic. By the time I finished I was convinced it was inevitable if our growing number of old people are to be well cared for, and the machines that govern our lives are to be properly maintained. The recognition of the vital role of the mainly non-graduate “key workers” in the pandemic was a step in the right direction.
And if western countries can do something as improbable as partially close their economies and collectively underwrite the incomes of millions, public policy can surely help to nudge status and reward a bit more evenly across the heads, hands and hearts.
Covid has split us – but it will also bring us back together
Covid strife stalks the land. The country that once linked arms to tackle an external threat has descended into fractiousness and bickering: those who are terrified by coronavirus vs the Covid cavaliers who don’t even wear masks on public transport, rule-of-six enthusiasts vs “have we all gone mad” refuseniks. We have slid from “I’ll do your shopping for you” to “I’ll shop you”.
As the new laws designed to suppress a second wave start to bite, many of us – including Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury – wonder how enforceable they really are from the centre, especially with huge regional variation and low levels of hospitalisations and deaths in most places. Is the Government now over-reacting to compensate for its earlier under-reaction? France has higher levels of new infections – yet has not significantly changed its Covid rules – and this weekend fans are returning to German football stadiums.
Are we now an outlier not only in Covid deaths but also in Covid conflict?
An increasing number of us have experienced an unpleasant incident, or have witnessed one, over pandemic norms. And many of us feel confused and anxious. In a post-deferential world, with a plethora of information sources, who can we trust and believe?
Polly Mackenzie, head of the Demos think tank, speaks for many when she sees the surge of solidarity and fellow feeling of the early pandemic frittered away. Last week, her think tank produced some polling findings claiming that Covid divides are now greater than Brexit ones: 58 per cent of mask wearers have negative attitudes towards non-mask wearers. What a surprise! Who likes those creepy, smelly things? I would probably have been part of the righteous 58 per cent if polled.
Obviously, the pandemic has been a troubling time and, come the winter and the deepening of economic pain, it might become worse. But I still think it has revealed more positive than negative things about community life in Britain – and that legacy will linger.
For a starter, we really have all been in this together. It goes without saying that we have not all been affected in the same way: rich/poor, black/white, old/young. But it has been a collective event that has touched everyone in one way or another, a single national conversation with many different and sometimes discordant voices.
And not only has the public been more altruistic and dutiful than many expected, as statistician Sir David Spiegelhalter has observed, there has also been a flowering of small-scale neighbourliness and acts of kindness. Think of the hundreds of thousands of WhatsApp groups that have sprung up all over the country as well as the national volunteering effort. I certainly know many of my neighbours better and local old people who were invisible to me before.
It is true that family life has been stretched to violent breaking point, in many cases, but overall far more people have rediscovered the consolations and reassurance of family. That same Demos poll found that nearly two-thirds of parents said the pandemic had been good for their relationship with their children.
At the national level, we have collectively underwritten the livelihoods of millions of workers in an enormous (and popular) act of collective solidarity and publicly recognised the work of some of the lowest status yet “key” workers who maintain the hidden wiring of our lives.
Perhaps I am suffering from Covid confirmation bias – the tendency to see your own assumptions about how the world should evolve confirmed by the pandemic – for I have just published a book called Head, Hand, Heart that argues that many of our contemporary troubles can be found in the allocation of too much reward and prestige to just one human aptitude: academic/analytical intelligence.
Obviously, high intelligence is as valuable as ever (in finding a vaccine for Covid-19 among other things), but that is no excuse for our current misalignments. The graduate bureaucracy – of people mainly no more able than their non-graduate peers – grows ever more bloated while we suffer big shortages in skilled trades and technician-type jobs (Hand) and recruitment crises in nursing and adult care (Heart).
The definition of a successful life has narrowed to getting a good degree and then into a cognitive-professional career, and, with 40 per cent of jobs (and all the best ones) graduate-only, it is no wonder people still clamber on the conveyor belt. But it now turns out that the knowledge economy does not need so many knowledge workers, even before AI really hits, so we have a generation of students with the wrong skills and disappointed expectations.
But there are several ways in which the pandemic should enable, in the language of my book, Hand (manual/craft work) and Heart (care and emotional work) to claim back some of the prestige and reward they have lost to Head in recent decades.
At the most macro level, the crisis has been the hour of the nation state and national social contracts, at least in Europe. National democracies will claim a greater say in the next phase of globalisation. There will be some reshoring and shortening of those long, vulnerable supply chains. Lowest-cost globalisation, which regrets the closure of the manufacturing plant but sees it as a price worth paying for cheaper goods in Bluewater, will no longer win the argument so easily.
This next phase will place more stress on localism (following Justin Welby), social stability and fairness; it will be more skeptical of the claims of the Head and the treadmill of the achievement society, with its apotheosis in our once helter-skelter global metropolitan centres.
As I was writing the book in 2019, I would not have dared to imagine the public appreciations of the Hand and Heart workers that became the dominant image of the early weeks of the crisis. In a partial inversion of the status hierarchy, many of the truly key workers turned out to be people who did not go to college and do not specialise in manipulating information.
The care economy has been at the centre of the crisis and that in itself will prompt some re-evaluation of economic and political thought. Just as old attitudes to large-scale government debt, and even printing money, have had to be revised even by conservative-minded politicians, so we may be pushed to reconsider our attitudes to productivity and even the very idea of the economic sphere.
Rich Western societies already spend a large part of GDP on care, health, and welfare; this share is likely to increase another step in the wake of the crisis. And, surely, we need to more openly acknowledge that what we want in many parts of the care economy, from ICUs to elderly care homes, is lower productivity – not higher. We want fewer beds per nurse, not more. This is true in large parts of the Heart economy, in health, and in education.
And if we are to upwardly revalue the public care economy, and fund better the Cinderella parts such as elderly care, then what about the work done in the domestic economy of the home looking after the young and the old? Should that not also be valued more, too, and not seen as a domain of limited opportunity to escape from as soon as possible?
This is how I see the crisis as readjusting the status balance, and it will reinforce an unusual coalition — a small-c conservative preference for the local, the national and the family, along with a social democratic preference for higher social spending and modest collectivism, plus a renewed concern for green issues.
British society has got things out of kilter in recent years. The pandemic will leave many scars – but it may also help nudge us towards a better balance of Head, Hand and Heart.
What we meritocracy critics get wrong - UnHerd
 
The idea of meritocracy is still a commonsensically good one to most people in public life, and to the man and woman in the street. But it has been under sustained attack in recent years. Much of the attack has come from the United States, which once saw itself as a meritocratic breakaway from aristocratic Europe. Recent books by Daniel Markovits, Kwame Anthony Appiah, Michael Sandel and Thomas Frank have all attacked meritocracy not just for being insufficiently meritocratic and too biased towards privilege, but also as a principle.
My own new book, Head, Hand, Heart, shares some of this critique, but my complaint is more that the type of merit that the modern meritocracy favours has been too narrowly focused on Head/cognitive ability. In order to shift more prestige and reward to the relatively neglected Hand and Heart aptitudes, we may, paradoxically, require more meritocracy in those spheres.
And while all of these books critique the principle, none of them really answers the question: if it is not merit that determines the allocation of reward and status, then what does?
Most mainstream politicians in developed democracies remain firmly wedded to the idea of meritocracy. It seems, after all, to combine fairness — rewarding people according to their abilities, not their family connections — and efficiency — getting the right people into the appropriate top jobs for the benefit of society as a whole. Moreover, it is easy and objective to measure through exams and related tests, or at least appears to be so.
Partly for those reasons, it was the moderate Left that first took up the banner of meritocracy and equality of opportunity in the 1980s and 1990s. It challenged undeserved privilege while avoiding the unattainable, and unpopular, goal of socialist transformation and equality of outcome and provided a story for the moderate Left at a time when it was conceding much of the economic argument to the Right. Meritocracy, it might be said, was a substitute for socialism when the latter seemed unviable.

Thatcherites didn’t talk about meritocracy so much but practised it, including in the Tory party itself where the estate agents were taking over from the grandees with estates. By the Major years, and even more for Cameron modernisers, meritocracy and equality of opportunity had become part of political common sense for Tories too. A new political consensus had been born.
Much of the intellectual Left, including in the UK, has now discarded the meritocracy banner. It is not hard to see why. It has been in the ascendancy as a political idea at a time when income inequality, especially in the US, has been reaching grotesque levels and social mobility seems to have slowed or even stalled. Meritocracy, by allowing a few people from disadvantaged homes to climb the ladder, stands accused of providing a fig leaf of legitimacy to old and new unfairnesses.
In the US, of those born in the lowest 20% of the income spectrum, only 5% make it to the top 20%. Meanwhile, more students from families in the top 1% of the income spectrum attend Ivy League universities than students from the whole of the bottom 50%. It is a similar story in the UK with those from the richest 20% of families seven times more likely to attend a Russell Group university than those from the bottom 40%.
Moreover, our experience with partial meritocracies has focused attention on just how hard it is to establish meaningful ones. In a free society that allows parents to pass on advantage to their children they will do so, and even without the extra leg-up of private education that will often be decisive in shaping life chances. As Polly Mackenzie puts it: “There are endless debates about whether ability comes from our genes, or the environment in which we are raised. It doesn’t matter… My parents gave me my genes and they gave me my childhood.”
So meritocracy can quickly ossify into a kind of oligarchy. Even if you don’t mind the tyranny of the talented, just wait, it will become the tyranny of the talented’s children, as American philosopher Tim Sommers pithily puts it.
The apparent impossibly of anything but a partial and flawed meritocracy has switched attention to the undesirability of the very principle itself. Much of the recent critique draws on the work of the pioneer meritocracy sceptic Michael Young, a socialist and one of the authors of the 1945 Labour manifesto. Young did not like meritocracy partly for simple egalitarian reasons: he did not like any inequality of reward and status whether based on merit or inheritance or anything else.

Michael Sandel is not a socialist but his book The Tyranny of Merit shares Young’s dismay at the idea that where we stand in the social pecking order is fair because it is merited. This can create despair among the losers, especially in modern secular societies which have eroded traditional meaning-generating social roles and religious consolation. And it can create hubris among the winners who believe their high status is deserved, ignoring both the luck and the social infrastructure that underpins their success.
Michael Young’s son Toby (who was a pupil of Sandel’s in his youth) takes a different view. “I like meritocracy for the same reason that my father disapproved of it: because it helps to secure peoples’ consent to the inequalities that are the inevitable consequence of limited government. I say this not as someone fond of inequality but as someone who believes limited government is preferable to a large coercive state.” Meritocracy does this by helping to create wealthy, dynamic societies; by allocating reward in a way that at least seems fairer than the alternatives; and by creating opportunities for some of those born on the wrong side of the tracks.
We meritocracy sceptics have to acknowledge that Young junior is still winning this argument, the meritocracy critique remains more persuasive in the seminar room than in the cauldron of modern politics. When I say to people that turning society into a competition that the most able win and the majority lose is a recipe for creating populist resentment, most people readily agree. Most people also accept the general egalitarian/Christian sense that all humans are of equal moral worth which ultimately underpins the meritocratic critique.
But these vague sentiments do not translate into practical policy ideas beyond the familiar notion that we should tax the rich, push minimum wages as high as possible and respect essential workers, even if low skilled, as we did in the early days of the pandemic.
The issue is this: there will always be hierarchies of competence and ability and those will tend to generate related hierarchies of both status and income. We can (and do) mitigate the latter but it is much harder to do something about the former. As the philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah has eloquently put it: “The goal is not to eradicate hierarchy and turn every mountain into a salt flat; we live in a plenitude of incommensurable hierarchies, and the circulation of social esteem will always benefit the better novelist, the more important mathematician, the savvier businessman, the faster runner, the more effective social entrepreneur.”
It is not in the gift of politicians to control the distribution of status, beyond some nudging at the margins, and when they have tried to do so and claimed to be implementing Marx’s “from each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs” it has not turned out well.

Moreover, nobody, not even Michael Young, really objects to the principle of meritocratic selection for jobs, particularly the most important ones. We want our best nuclear physicists to be in charge of our nuclear research programme; it is not something that can be chosen by lottery. And who wants to be operated on by a surgeon who failed their exams? So, the puzzled voter might ask, “you want meritocracy for jobs, but you don’t want a meritocratic society, how does that work?”.
It is a subtle distinction but a real one, somewhat akin to Lionel Jospin’s wanting a market economy but not a market society. And the key word is want. The minimum that meritocracy critics require is an acknowledgement of what Sandel calls the “dark side” of meritocracy, that it is a pragmatic labour market principle not an ideal for the good society. The reward to merit should be balanced by other principles such as the equal moral worth of all citizens and an awareness of the fact that merit is generated by society, through family, education and so on, as well as by the individual. (Listen to Yascha Mounk’s excellent interview with Sandel on his The Good Fight podcast.)
This, however, does not produce an especially distinctive politics for meritocracy critics, beyond a mild form of social democracy. My own approach in Head, Hand, Heart offers an alternative with more traction. I argue that the problem is not so much meritocracy itself, though the principle deserves a proper scepticism, but rather the rise and rise of the cognitive meritocracy in recent decades. This has over-promoted one form of human aptitude. The political task is to try to spread some of the reward and status hoarded by the cognitively blessed to those with aptitudes related to Hand (technical and craft) and Heart (caring and emotional intelligence). It is a call for a wider understanding of what constitutes merit and indeed skill.
The cognitive takeover of the past 40 years has been actively promoted by public policy and has now become dysfunctional. It has created too narrow a definition of a successful life: do well at school, go to a good university and into a decent professional job. It has also, with the expansion of higher education driven forward by Tony Blair, created a single ladder up to safety and success through the modern university. There used to be many more little ladders up and more promotion from below in big organisations, now around 40% of jobs are graduate-only.

So, the answer is not so much to suppress the idea of meritocracy — which remains the worst system for allocating reward apart from all the others — but to spread it more widely. This is easier said than done. Non-cognitive forms of merit in craft or care are often harder to quantify. As Madeleine Bunting points out in her new book Labours of Love: The Crisis of Care the containment of pain and distress is elusive and hard to measure, and care is usually embodied work in a culture dominated by the abstract and analytical.
And we typically apply cognitive criteria even in non-cognitive fields. If you ask an economist why people working in care homes are so poorly paid he or she will say because anyone can do it. But that is just saying that minimal qualifications are required. Anyone who has worked in a hospital or care home, or even visited one, knows that there are good carers, middling ones and poor ones, as in other areas of life. Yet we often lack the meritocratic selection mechanisms for distinguishing and rewarding them.
The ‘spreading rather than suppressing’ approach to meritocracy now has history on its side. For we are reaching Peak Head. The knowledge economy doesn’t need as many knowledge workers as had been assumed, and AI is increasingly coming for the middling and lower cognitive jobs. Education policy, social mobility policy and even economic policy in the UK have all been partly premised on the idea of an ever expanding cognitive-professional class of graduates. But in recent years this has slowed to a crawl: in 2000, the proportion of the workforce in the top two social classes in the UK was 35%, today it is 37%.
Higher education is still pumping out graduates while the graduate premium is less than 10% for the majority of men (once you control for education differences prior to college) and more than one third of graduates are not in graduate jobs more than five years after graduating. This is creating a crisis of expectations which may lie behind both the Bernie Sanders and Jeremy Corbyn eruptions. Meanwhile there are recruitment crises in nursing, care homes, skilled trades and middling technical functions.

Much of the expansion of the cognitive meritocracy was necessary at the time. And it is far better to have a mass graduate elite of one third of the population than the much narrower elite when I went to college. But no thought ever seems to have been given to what I call the 15/50 problem, meaning when 15% of your school peers go to college and you don’t it is not a big deal, when nearly half go and you don’t it is a different matter.
This is not, of course, an argument against the importance of intelligence and knowledge in our society both for individuals and for a post Brexit Britain that must remain a global centre of education, science and innovation. But we have got things out of kilter. The mass knowledge economy jobs are going and the future is likely tilt more towards care, coding and craft. The idea that a majority of people would be taking up prestigious professional jobs requiring analytical intelligence and delivering a sense of purpose and even self-expression, is not going to happen. Most people still regard work as just a means of earning a living and get their sense of meaning and self-expression away from work. This may apply to even more of us in the future.
Nietzsche spotted a long time ago that the idea of democratic equality runs up against the reality of big variations in human ability and that democracy would thus find it hard to escape a plague of mass resentment. It has done pretty well so far, at least since the Second World War. But if mass resentment is not to make a reappearance, people need to feel respected and useful. That in turn requires a better spread of reward and status across those three clusters of aptitude relating to Head, Hand and Heart. Democracy is now demanding it.
A lesson for your children: the professional class is full
 
My son is one of the lucky ones. After a Covid-blighted final term at Edinburgh University he is training to be a primary school teacher. Many other graduates are looking out on a more uncertain future.
But behind the short-term disruption of the pandemic looms a bigger misalignment of skills and human expectations. The notion that a good degree and prestigious professional job is the root to security and success is still alive and well in the minds of most parents in the UK, and indeed policy-makers.
Yet for many graduates it is a dwindling likelihood. It turns out that the knowledge economy does not need so many knowledge workers. The era of the steady expansion of the class of cognitive professionals is coming to an end.
In law, accountancy, administration, medicine and in middling and lower-end cognitive jobs, artificial intelligence — AI — is on its way. And even before the AI revolution gets under way, we have seen a decline in the pay and status of the average graduate job as a result of the diminishing returns you get when the proportion of school-leavers going to university rises to about 40%.
Membership of the top two social classes — the higher and lower ends of the professional/managerial class — has grown to more than one-third of the adult population in recent decades as the economy demanded more highly educated workers, and higher education expanded to provide them. But in the UK and America that growth in professional jobs has almost ground to a halt.
Already many graduates are doing £22,000-a-year back-office clerical jobs often similar to those done by their non-graduate parents. This means that the continuing expansion of higher education is becoming economically and politically dysfunctional. Unprecedented investment in universities has not prevented the recent decline in productivity, and some economists even argue the decline may be partly caused by the growth of the cognitive bureaucracy. At the same time we have a crisis of recruitment in many corners of the public care economy and in middle-skill technical jobs and skilled trades.
A mass graduate elite is preferable to the narrow one when I went to college, but without the high-status jobs that its members believe is their birthright, it’s creating a crisis of expectations that has probably contributed to radical outbursts such as the Bernie Sanders movement in America and the Corbynite Momentum movement here.
Longer term, the only answer is to steer people away from the idea that membership of the graduate meritocracy is the only worthwhile goal. The idea of a successful life has, in any case, become too narrow, and we have created just one big ladder up into it: the modern university. Until recently there were more little ladders, with promotion from below still possible in many organisations, and a wider notion of a good life.
Meanwhile, the idea of meritocracy itself has taken a battering. Recent books by Daniel Markovits and Michael Sandel stress the impossibility of a fair meritocracy in any free society that allows families to pass on advantage, but both also stress the inherent undesirability of turning society into a competition in which the most able win and many of the rest feel like failures. We still need selection by merit into relevant jobs — especially top jobs — but that does not require a meritocratic society that disproportionately values those adept at manipulating information.
My own new book — Head Hand Heart — echoes some of these ideas but places more stress on the imbalance that modern societies have created between the cluster of aptitudes corresponding to those three organs.
Modern societies have made “head” cognitive ability too much the gold standard of esteem while status and reward has drained away from many “hand” (manual/technical) and “heart” (caring/nurturing) functions, contributing to the recent mass political alienation.
Of course, high intelligence is as socially useful today as ever, and someone who invents a Covid vaccine or works out how to suck carbon out of the atmosphere is creating more value than an office cleaner and should be rewarded accordingly. But there is nothing special about most lower-level cognitive jobs. Is a junior account manager at a PR firm more valuable than a bus driver?
The post-Brexit UK will thrive only if it remains a centre of education, research and innovation. It must therefore cherish its research universities while at the same time reinventing vocational and technical education — a difficult balancing act.
But there will be fewer jobs manipulating information in the future and more jobs in care and technical functions, which require less academic training and more emotional and practical intelligence. There is more than one scale of human worth.
When I started writing my book I thought the idea of spreading status more evenly between head, hand and heart was utopian. By the time I finished I was convinced it was inevitable if our old people are to be better cared for and the machines that govern our lives are to be properly maintained. The recognition of the vital role of the mainly non-graduate “key workers” in the pandemic was a step in the right direction.
And if western countries can do something as improbable as partially close economies and collectively underwrite the incomes of millions, public policy can surely help to nudge status and reward a bit more evenly across the different aptitudes.
From racial bias to gender wars, UK is not as backwards as the media suggests
There are invisible gravitational forces in society that direct our attention towards certain facts or trends and away from others. A combination of the natural “bad news” bias of the media and a welcome sensitivity to injustice and discrimination means that in many areas of public life – particularly in relations between the races, sexes and generations – we are often encouraged to believe that things are worse than they are.
Commentators, TV anchors and even Government officials will state things as fact which are simply not true, or are at least highly contentious. Those things have, in the old language of newspaper offices, entered “the cuttings file” and once there they can be very hard to move. So here is my current “little list” of things that I have recently heard described in the media as self-evident truths that are anything but.
First, let us consider race. Hardly anyone would claim that Britain is free of racial discrimination but the provision of detailed evidence has not been a strong point of the UK Black Lives Matter movement. The two pieces of evidence that are most often cited is, first, the CV test that finds that those with ethnic minority names have to send more applications to get a job interview and, second, the fact that black people are eight times more likely to be stopped and searched by police than whites.
Both of these claims carry weight but it is worth pointing out that one group with typically minority names are British Indians who do considerably better than the white British average in terms of labour market outcomes. On stop and search much of the disproportionality falls away once you look at where stop and search is actually happening: in inner city areas with high levels of violent crime.
Meanwhile on the positive side you will almost certainly not be aware that 35 per cent of British Caribbean men are now found in the top two social classes (in the eight class schema), up from an average of 11 per cent in the 1980s/1990s. This is only slightly less than the white British proportion (though there are more whites in the very top class). And you will certainly not know that hate crime has been falling pretty steadily for the past 20 years. The hate crime that you are always told is going up is police recorded hate crime that rose by 10 per cent from 2017/18 to 2018/19. That is a rise from 94,121 to 103,379. But, unlike 20 years ago, the Police today rightly encourage the reporting of all kinds of hate crime and it is much easier and more convenient to do so.
Fortunately, we have a more reliable source of crime data that is not subject to the changing priorities of Police forces and politicians. The Crime Survey of England and Wales (CSEW) is a huge survey of people that asks people what has actually happened to them and the most recent data shows that between 2015/16 and 2017/18 there were an estimated 184,000 hate crimes on average per year (which includes the real but short-term hate crime blip just after the 2016 Brexit vote). That is down from 266,000 between 2009/10 and 2011/12 and down further from 307,000 between 2007/8 and 2008/9.
What about relations between the sexes? Much has been made of how much more domestic labour women have been doing compared with men in lockdown, at least for those with school-aged children. But in fact the gap between male and female domestic labour has been narrowing in recent years.
According to the Centre for Time Use Research, men’s share of all unpaid work in the home has risen from 27 per cent to nearly 40 per cent since the 1970s and around two-thirds of fathers are classified as involved fathers meaning they spend an average of two hours a day on childcare.
It is also assumed that most women want to hurry back to full-time work as soon as possible and are therefore mourning the closure of all those childcare providers. Yet more state support to make it easier to stay at home when kids are young would be just as popular with young mothers. According to the Government’s Childcare And Early Years Survey, 37 per cent of women with children under four would give up work completely to look after their children and 65 per cent would like to work fewer hours if they could afford it.
What about the generations? The idea that baby boomers and those just a little older had it easy with free university, good pensions and cheap houses to buy forgets that they also experienced de-industrialisation and the first mass unemployment since the war. Moreover, until the 1980s, fewer than 10 per cent of school leavers went to university and most of those generous pensions were in the public sector.
There was no internet or cheap air travel when the boomers were young but there was lead in petrol and you were more likely to die in a road accident. It was much harder to rent privately so buying houses was the only option and those growing up more recently have enjoyed lower income tax and a big increase in transfer payments to people of working age with children. Boomer women faced more bias in jobs and much more harassment when young, and older boomers have had to suffer the failings of our under-financed elderly care system.
Finally, there is one example where things are worse than assumed: social class. Everyone knows, because we are constantly being told, that the tripling of university tuition fees in 2012 had no impact on people going on to further education from lower income backgrounds, whose numbers kept rising. Yet that has been true only of kids going straight from school, the participation of mature students from low income backgrounds fell off a cliff. If you include part-timers there has been an overall 16 per cent fall in the number of students from disadvantaged areas since 2012.
So watch out for those invisible gravitational forces of opinion formation and all those things you know that ain’t necessarily so.
Why universities had to be challenged - UnHerd
 
It is now official. The helter skelter expansion of UK higher education ushered in 21 years ago by Tony Blair’s pledge to send half of school leavers to university is now at an end.
And the announcement by the education secretary, Gavin Williamson, came not a moment too soon. The headlong rush into mass academic higher education, leapfrogging even the US, happened faster in the UK than in most other comparable countries and it seemed to happen on automatic pilot, with remarkably little thought given to the economic or social consequences. The only serious debate we ever had was on tuition fees.
Already about 30% of school leavers were heading to university when Blair made his pledge in 1999, but the accelerated push for 50% (which on some measures was reached last year) has turned out to have very significant unintended consequences, many of them negative.
Consider the following: more than a third of UK graduates are in non-graduate employment more than five years after graduating and the graduate pay premium is shrinking to below 10% for nearly half of male graduates; meanwhile employers are desperately short of people with higher manual and technical skills and there are big shortages in both the skilled trades and the care economy. At the same time, more than a third of all jobs, and most of the good ones, are graduate only, shutting out people without degrees. And in the period when the proportion of graduates in the adult population has risen to 35% (and around 45% among the under-30s) productivity has declined, social mobility has at best flat-lined and cultural divides have grown starker.

Yet we are so used to thinking of a university education as an automatic good and a passport to a successful life for pretty well anyone that the powerful university lobby still has a powerful grip on the country’s imagination. It is sure to hit back at the new course that the Government is setting as it attempts to re-set the economic and cultural signals away from the classical university to a much wider variety of post-school options.
Jo Johnson the former Tory universities minister complained last week that there was no evidence that sending fewer young people to university “is the route to a more productive economy”. That may be so, but there is no evidence on the other side either (causality in such matters is notoriously difficult to establish) and it is a simple historical fact that the most rapid post-war economic and productivity growth happened when barely 10% of school leavers went to university in the 1960s.
There is an extraordinary amount of magical thinking about the beneficial impact of higher education on productivity, economic growth and social mobility, (the education writer Alison Wolf compares it to the Soviet Union ’s irrational belief in capital goods). In fact, to repeat, all of these things have been stagnating in the years that university enrolments have been roaring ahead and rich countries with very different numbers of graduates can produce very similar growth and productivity numbers.
More graduate teachers and doctors, and other public service professionals, were required with the big expansion of the welfare state in the 1960s and 1970s. And there was strong demand for graduates when the knowledge economy took off in the 1980s. All of this helped to create today’s more open and democratic mass professional elite. It is also true that the UK saw a productivity surge in the 1980s and 1990s, as graduate numbers were rising, (though that was largely thanks to the Thatcherite elimination of the least productive companies and even sectors).
In more recent decades it has been a very different story. The American economist Robert Gordon, in his book The Rise and Fall of American Growth, says that innovation has been nose-diving in the era when there has never been more investment in research universities. Productivity has been in particularly sharp decline in those parts of the economy that are graduate-dominated. And some analysis even sees professional bureaucratization stemming from mass higher education as an active drag on productivity.
Moreover, higher education has done nothing to reduce inequality and its expansion in recent decades has clearly widened the value and cultural divides that have contributed to the votes for Brexit and Trump. This is particularly true in the UK which is an international outlier both in the high number that go to residential universities and the lack of a prestigious technical college alternative to university (after the polytechnics were abolished in 1992).

One reason that the rapid expansion of higher education, to half of school leavers, seemed self-evidently desirable to those in the room when the decision was made is that all of them were graduates — a classic case of groupthink.
One man in that room and closely involved in discussions over Labour’s 50% target was David Soskice, the LSE political economist and son of former Labour Home Secretary Frank Soskice. When I spoke to him about the target he can remember nobody in government involved in the decision raising any objections. The economy seemed to want more graduates, judging by the (then) graduate income premium, and university was regarded as a ladder of social mobility for those from middle- and lower-income groups.
What I call the 15/50 problem does not seem to have been considered: the idea that when 15% of people in your class or school or town go to university and you don’t, it does not create a ‘left behind’ problem, but when 50% go to university and you don’t it does create such a psychological problem.
And it is absurd that so much higher education spending is focused on those aged 18 to 22. Many of them have acquired useful life experience and grown into young adults away from home for an extended period for the first time. Many have also acquired useful professional skills or pursued intellectual interests for the sheer joy of it. But far too many have learned little of value, and what they have learned they have quickly forgotten, their degree acting primarily as a signal to a future employer that they have the right personal characteristics to enter the bloated cognitive class. It is a ranking system and, in the UK, it is reinforced by the physical and social separation of the residential universities. And the sorting hat of higher education creates a qualification treadmill requiring ever more differentiation, with post-graduate degrees now booming.
Some people argue that more or less everyone should go to something called a university and the colleges should then specialise in different kinds of education and vocational training. Such people point to the fact that around 40% of university courses, and even more in the post-1992 universities, are essentially vocational — whether traditional, high-prestige, vocational courses such as medicine, law and engineering, or newer university degrees such as nursing, quantity surveying or marketing.

Yet the relevant question for the UK is this: is a classical university — with its bias towards academic essay-writing skills, and lecturers who are often researchers first and teachers second — the best place to deliver the kind of higher vocational skills that many individuals want to acquire and that the economy, especially in the UK, so badly needs? Public opinion in the UK clearly does not think so. A survey by the think tank Onward found that 66% of respondents agreed that more people going to university and fewer gaining technical qualifications had been bad for the country overall; 34% said it was beneficial.
Yet the current incentives in the UK, from very tangible financial ones to less tangible cultural ones, focus on three- or four-year fulltime courses for 18–19-year-olds, usually at residential universities which is very expensive both for the country and the individuals concerned and not always an effective use of someone ’s time. And those incentives tend to discourage part-time study, mature students, shorter diploma-type higher vocational courses. Moreover, thanks to the student-demand-led higher education funding system the UK was in the bizarre position, in the 2011–17 period, of increasing university teaching funding in physics by just 6% per student, compared with 27% for business degrees and 34% for sports sciences.
It is not that we are investing too much in education in general, but too much is going on signalling efforts for the higher-level exam-passers and not enough on the vocational, professional and technical skills, and indeed the lifelong learning, that most of the population, and the economy, need to flourish. It is a bit like acquiring a state-of-the-art nuclear weapon while your tanks and artillery decay.
If, thanks to an oversupply of graduates, advertisements for teaching assistants or accounting technicians begin to routinely require a degree, it is common sense for individuals who wish to work in these fields to obtain one. But it would be better for both individuals and society if the arms race could be called off and access to such jobs restored to conscientious school leavers and apprentices, as used to be the case.

Moreover, today’s graduates, as Paul Lewis of King’s College, London, argues, tend to have unrealistic expectations of high-status, well-paid jobs and when they are actually employed in the middling technical or junior manager jobs that their non-graduate parents might have done they quickly become dissatisfied. The system is producing the wrong mix of skills, with too many graduates and too few actual technicians and skilled trades jobs especially in construction, health and information technology from coders to web designers. UK employers in 2017 complained that they had trouble filling more than 40% of skilled trades vacancies.
We are suffering an epidemic of square pegs in round holes. And these disappointed graduate expectations may lie behind some of the more extreme campus identity politics and eruptions of political emotion from the Corbyn movement to Black Lives Matter.
It is true that longer, residential courses are popular with students — many are naturally attracted to three years fun and freedom away from parents at age 18/19 — but the high cost (both for the individual and the taxpayer) and disappointing returns is starting to shift attitudes. And if Covid-19 is going to mean a permanent reduction in the flow of international students, whose high fees have helped to subsidise the system in the UK, this middle-class rite of passage may be a luxury the UK can no longer afford. The residential experience can be a useful one in learning how to cooperate and rub along with people from different backgrounds but there must be other ways of providing that experience through residential apprenticeships or civic volunteering schemes.
The obvious point is that university does not produce the best outcomes for everyone. It makes no sense for many young people, from all social classes, who do not flourish in the rigorous academic environment that a university should be (but increasingly is not). And it makes even less sense for an economy that requires a range of skills and aptitudes many of which are better acquired in workplaces or other kinds of post-school educational institution.
And it is surely just self-defeating to assume that the answer to our growing education-based status (and income) divides is to send even more people to university. People from all backgrounds, especially less privileged ones, should be encouraged to go to elite universities if they have the aptitude for it. But in Germany it is perfectly normal for middle class children to do an apprenticeship or go to a technical college. And congratulations to Gavin Williamson for declaring he would be very happy if one of his children were to take a non-university path after school.
In my observation too much of the case for mass higher education is based on an indiscriminate spirit of not wanting to kick away the ladder on the part of people who have had a valuable university experience themselves. It is a decent instinct but it also contains within it a kind of narcissism that says: be like me, pass exams at school, go to a Russell Group university and enjoy a successful professional career.

But there are strict limits on the number of people who can do that, even if everyone in the society had exactly the same level of cognitive ability. There is also a strict limit on the number of higher professional jobs. Indeed, it turns out that the knowledge economy doesn’t need so many knowledge workers after all; AI is now coming for the middling cognitive jobs that university expansion was designed to train people for.
And isn’t it better to widen the sources of achievement and try to raise the status of ‘not university’ rather than send as many people as possible to university, and in the process raise expectations of professional success that in many cases are likely to be disappointed, while starving the economy of the middling, technical skills it needs?
Tony Blair’s target has turned out to be bad economics, bad politics, and even bad for academic standards, as the value of a first class degree or 2:1 has plummeted.
There is no need for the Government to actually close universities. But thanks to the Covid crisis and an imminent demographic bulge, which would require another 20 or 30 universities to keep to the current proportion of undergraduates, it can encourage university mergers and just allow the proportion of school leavers going to university to slip back down to 30 or 35%, roughly the level when the Blair pledge was made.
Meanwhile if the Government gets its reforms right many more school leavers will find more satisfying, and more economically relevant, alternative forms of non-academic post-school education.
This week's big questions: Could you live on £53 a week? How should
Is Mick Philpott a “vile product of Welfare UK”, as one newspaper put it this week?
Claiming benefits doesn’t make people kill their kids. Philpott is clearly a very odd and unusual man. It is true that his particular way of life – having so many children, living with multiple women, refusing to work – would not have been possible without the welfare state, but making something possible and causing something are not the same thing.
Could you live on £53 a week?
Yes I could, but only because I have savings and friends and family who could help out. I also have a properly insulated house and a well-stocked freezer. As recent work on the multidimensional nature of poverty by Demos shows, it is not just about income, but also about assets and debt, the quality of housing and the state of one’s health. Those who do have to live on £53 a week over a long period (and there are probably not many of them) face a “heat or eat” crisis if the fridge or boiler breaks.
Is the National Health Service as we’ve known it since 1948 now a thing of the past?
Of course not. Receiving care free at the point of need remains unchanged, and that is what people most value about the NHS. My impression is that Labour left the NHS in a pretty decent state. But something so big and hungry for resources can always be better organised. The latest reforms are not that far from what Labour was doing, but were not urgently necessary. I think there is a failure of care, but that reflects wider social changes and is hard to reverse.
Is “Osbornomics” dead in the water?
There is no such thing. The Tory economic plan was that cutting the deficit would be balanced by loose monetary policy stimulating export-led private sector expansion. It hasn’t worked out like that, partly because of the effect of a deleveraging financial sector, but also because of the eurozone crisis and our inability to export in the volume required. Meanwhile, cutting the deficit has been postponed.
How should the West deal with North Korea’s warmongering?
The Mutually Assured Destruction logic of nuclear conflict was always based on the idea of rational actors, and we cannot be sure that the North Koreans are rational. As in the threat from any rogue state, we have to be ready to talk and try to coax them on to a different path while also keeping up our guard (which in this case may include preparing for the use of battlefield nuclear weapons). And what about all that talk of power shifting east and the new superpower China? Why has China not sorted out its client state?
Is Tony Hall right to be confident about the future of the BBC?
Yes, so long as he can account for his actions during the Jimmy Savile era. The BBC is an enormous part of our national culture, and we need it more, not less, as ways of life become more diverse. But much as I enjoy Family Guy and American Dad, do we need a whole BBC channel dedicated to showing repeats of those programmes with a bit of reality TV thrown in? Hall should focus more on what only the BBC can do.
Should Sunderland have appointed Paolo Di Canio?
Yes. His alleged fascism did not seem to be a problem at Swindon. Also, as a Chelsea supporter, the more internal ructions at a competitor Premier League club the better. It’s a shame Manchester United didn’t appoint him.
Is Theresa May right to promise to speed up visas for Chinese people wanting to come to Britain?
Yes. People overstaying visas is a big problem. It is estimated that about 20 per cent of the two million visas we issue every year are overstayed. But this is not a problem with the Chinese who want to come here and get to know Britain and bring in valuable income for the tourism and retail sectors. They are mainly rich and successful and patriotic; very few of them will turn into illegal immigrants.
In your new book about immigration, you argue for a political culture of integration. How do we achieve this?
Read my book! Integration is a very slippery idea and we tend to have conflicting intuitions about it: understanding, on the one hand, that people will often prefer to live and mix with people like themselves; on the other hand, we feel that a good society is one in which people feel at ease with their fellow citizens (of all kinds), which requires contact. My three priorities: language lessons for newcomers free at the point of use (plus a free DVD of Danny Boyle’s Olympics opening ceremony); a duty on public bodies to promote ethnic mixing wherever possible (rather than the vaguer social cohesion); leaning against the growing segregation in schools with clever use of catchment areas or even quotas. (Church of England schools often have a 25 per cent non-Christian quota; other schools could do something similar.)
Who’s going to win the Grand National?
Flying Lasagne.
Elite should wake up to Ukip success
Labour will comfortably retain the Wythenshawe and Sale East seat in Thursday's by-election, but the headlines are likely to be about the advance of Ukip and how it wins votes in Labour as well as Tory places.
The fascination with Ukip is galling for the big parties but fully justified – not only because the Ukip vote will be one of the key factors in the 2015 election, but also because of what it tells us about modern Britain.
To many voters, Ukip is just a convenient vehicle for a grumpy protest vote, accompanied by vague feelings that politicians are self-interested and remote. But the rise of Ukip is also a corrective signal, a reaction to the overprofessionalisation and overcentralisation of politics in London and Brussels and a symptom of a new fault line in political values between a London-centric graduate elite and much of the rest of the country.
Our political system is not in crisis – indeed, the emergence of Ukip is evidence of its responsiveness – but it promises too much and delivers too little. Democracy has come to mean not just a way of peacefully changing governments but also a way of controlling one's individual and communal destiny. Yet democracy is also unavoidably collectivist and compromise-based; you cannot achieve control as a democratic citizen in the way that you can as a shopper on Amazon.
Moreover, democracy's promise of control conflicts with the logic of the markets that generate our wealth. The market is restless and disruptive, giving you the iPhone and cheap flights but also exporting your job to China and then importing east Europeans to compete with you at home.
So the puffed-up politician is bound to be deflated by our semi-internationalised economies, and by promising a control he cannot deliver he fosters the cynical attitudes of today's voters.
But there's another reason for the sense of lassitude that drives populism. As left vs right has faded, the value divide between the political class and the ordinary voter has grown wider. This is especially true on the "security and identity" issues such as welfare, immigration and national sovereignty, but also in education and the labour market – partly explaining the "you're all the same" response from so many voters.
The political elite used to represent a range of experiences and interests. Now, MPs may have different starting points but, like other members of the upper professional class, they mainly leave home in their late teens to go to university and thence into a world of physical and social mobility with an identity based on career and achievement. Most non-graduates are less mobile and draw their sense of themselves much more from place and group. (About 60 per cent of Britons live within 20 miles of where they lived when they were 14.)
Our elites tend to be liberal both economically and socially, the ordinary voter communitarian or post-liberal. Post-liberalism is a policy wonk term, but it essentially means sticking with what works in the market liberalism of the 1980s and social liberalism of the 1960s but responding to their failures and unintended consequences and paying greater respect to the intuitions of more rooted citizens.
It combines ideas from left and right and post-liberals can be found in both main parties. Several coalition policies – including welfare reform and reducing immigration – appeal to the latent post-liberal majority, and Jon Cruddas (among others) is nudging Labour in a more post-liberal direction.
Post-liberalism is comfortable with the "individualism plus rights" basis of modern politics but wants to balance it with ideas that mainstream liberalism has neglected: the value of stability and continuity in communities, character, the dignity of labour. It favours particular allegiances over universal claims, and is uneasy about the unconditional openness imposed by globalisation: it knows that change is often experienced as loss and wants to cushion it.
By contrast, many upper professionals favour wide but thin attachments and a more universalist outlook – and therefore tend to think public goods should be distributed mainly according to need. Most people believe support should be based on contribution or on past service.
Another point of tension between the elite and the majority is over social mobility. Nobody in Britain is against bright people from whatever background travelling as far as their talents will take them, and who is against getting the best qualified people into the right jobs? But listening to politicians talk about social mobility it often sounds like the upwardly mobile (or the already privileged) insisting that everyone should become more or less like them. Not only is that logically impossible, but it also presents a very narrow vision of what a good life entails.
Post-liberalism is not against aspiration or ambition, especially for those at the bottom, but it prefers the idea of vocation; aspiration implies a moving up and out which casts a shadow over the lives left behind. The focus in the past 15 years on reforming higher education and the continuing neglect of technical/higher manual skills reflects the concerns of a graduate elite whose own children are insulated from the negative aspects of the "hour glass" labour market in which about 40 per cent of people are in skilled, well-paid work but a bottom third are stuck in poorly paid service jobs.
A good society is not a collection of ladders; it is a circle of mutual interest. The best and brightest still rise to the top but all contribution is valued. Michael Young's famous critique of meritocracy is more relevant today than ever.
All mainstream political leaders will be getting tough on populists like Nigel Farage in the coming months, but let us also be tough on the causes of populism – and one cause is the ascendancy of a liberalism that rubs up against the values of too many decent people. Post-liberalism is the reasonable answer to the march of the populists.
My proposal that could keep Britain in Europe
I am now convinced that David Cameron can win the European Union referendum in 2017, so long as the Ukip surge does not hand power to the other guy next May. Why am I so confident? Because I have just spent a few days in the Italian countryside at a conference full of the Europhile great and good, and they have started to bend to the reformist mood.
The EU is struggling with two giant projects – the euro and freedom of movement – which are not working as intended, mainly because as currently designed they are not compatible with national social contracts. And the good news from Britain's point of view is that, at least in the case of freedom of movement, it can be fixed.
This is how: the period before an EU citizen acquires "habitual residence" in another EU country – and thus the full social, welfare and labour market rights of a national citizen – should be pushed back from three months to two years. This is simple and fair and is something David Cameron could gather a broad coalition of EU countries around. Someone from another EU country would still be free to enter Britain and look for a job and use public services from day one; they would not, however, be able to draw on in-work or out-of-work benefits or social housing or any kind of state support until they had been resident for two years. Two years would be a ceiling, if countries want a shorter qualifying period they can have one.
This represents a big symbolic shift and could be sold to voters as a significant British-led innovation. It would restore some "national citizen favouritism" and "earned citizenship" into the system. At the same time, the flows of people probably wouldn't change much. So it could be sold to other EU countries as a minor adjustment and to the British public as a revolutionary change. Perfect!
For some in Britain, it does not go far enough. And there is a case for limiting access to the NHS for a period and even, as No 10 is considering, a Swiss-style "safeguard clause" allowing restrictions if flows get too high.
But the encouraging thing to emerge from my Italian conference is that EU enthusiasts, who in the past would never have contemplated the two-year delay proposal, embraced it when I floated it. (One Scottish Labour peer, the embodiment of progressivism, even wanted three years, not two.) The Italian participants, mainly the kind who prefer to be ruled from Brussels than from Rome, also liked the idea.
This is now the new normal, and Cameron must build on it. One of Britain's problems is that we have had precious little political class consensus on EU policy over recent decades. If Cameron could get agreement on the two-year plan from the Liberal Democrats and Labour, who now talk about "fair movement, not free movement", it would carry more weight with other big EU countries.

